The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Exclusives (vol. 1 of 3)
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: The Exclusives (vol. 1 of 3)


Author: Lady Charlotte Campbell Bury

Release date: October 13, 2017 [eBook #55744]

Language: English

Credits: Produced by Chris Whitehead and the Online Distributed
        Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
        produced from images generously made available by The
        Internet Archive)


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE EXCLUSIVES (VOL. 1 OF 3) ***




Produced by Chris Whitehead and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from images generously made available by The
Internet Archive)









  THE
  EXCLUSIVES.

  VOL. I.




  THE
  EXCLUSIVES.

  IN THREE VOLUMES.

  VOL. I.

  SECOND EDITION.

  LONDON:
  HENRY COLBURN AND RICHARD BENTLEY,
  NEW BURLINGTON STREET.

  1830.




  LONDON:

  Printed by J. L. Cox, Great Queen Street,
  Lincoln's-Inn Fields.




THE EXCLUSIVES.




CHAPTER I.

THE BOUDOIR.


The boudoir of a woman of fashion exhibits in its history, if
faithfully recorded, a picture of the manners, modes, and morals of the
times; and, however little such things in themselves might deserve to
be handed down, or registered as objects of imitation, yet to chronicle
them for the day would not be without its use. The sensible part of
mankind would laugh at the follies, and wonder at the extravagance,
which the page of such ephemeral history unfolded; while the actors in
the scene might possibly view in the mirror held up to them their own
lives, and their own actions, in a new and truer light.

Lady Tilney's boudoir,--the boudoir _par excellence_,--was not in fact
a boudoir, according to the old legitimate meaning of the word. Indeed,
Lady Tilney herself, the presiding deity of the sanctuary, professed
her contempt of legitimacy in boudoirs, as well as in sovereigns; at
least she did so in words, though, like many other professors, her
words and actions frequently contradicted each other; and it may be
questioned if there are any greater despots, than those who inveigh
most against despotism.

But to return from this digression to the boudoir. Lady Tilney's
boudoir was destined to the reception of far other votaries than
those of the old _rabattu_ god of love. No: her boudoir was visited
by persons of a very different character from those who were formerly
the frequenters of such a scene. Authors, poets, political intriguers,
artists, and committees for the management of the state of society,
formed the chief personages among those who figured there, and their
business was of a very different complexion from that of the supposed
use, or original meaning ascribed to a boudoir.

In the former, of old, the painted harpsichord, the huge cabinet, the
gigantic chimney-piece, the tapestried wall, were suited to the silken
garb, and bag and sword, that formed the attire of the male part of
its visitants; as well as to the hoop and fly-cap of the ladies who
presided there. In this modern temple of idolatry, only a few of
the ancient decorations were allowed a place, such as the marquetry
cabinet, the _or-moulu_ clock, or vase of China; but for the rest, what
a change!

Volumes of worth, and works of merit and deep learning, were now
covered by the novels of the day, or hidden by trivial elegancies newly
imported from Paris; while on the walls, the rare productions of Titian
or Vandyck were intermingled with some chalky portrait of the modern
school, tricked out in the millinery geer of the fashion of the day.
Scattered on the tables, however, there was a redeeming feature in the
character of the decorative objects which met the eye, for there lay
some richly chased gold ornaments, the works of Benvenuto Cellini, or
some one not less skilful, though it may be of forgotten name; and
while these ornamented the apartment, they served the double purpose of
affording Lady Tilney an opportunity, not only to discourse on their
beauty, but to enter into all the particulars of Cellini's strange life.

Add to this description of the boudoir and its visitants, the
occasional presence of Lady Tilney's beautiful children, and its
portraiture is closed; but not so the genius and history of all the
transactions, councils, and cabals which took place there. These will
be best understood, by passing from the boudoir to Lady Tilney's own
character and pursuits; if to describe these by any means were indeed
possible: but it would be an endless, hopeless task, to enumerate all
that Lady Tilney did, or fancied _she did_--still more what she said;
for to do her justice, her's was no vapid existence of the mere routine
of a London lady's life.

No--indolence was not the besetting sin, insipidity was not the vice
of her _morale_ or her _physique_. But as to enumerating severally the
subjects which employed her care, and the various branches of these
subjects into which she diverged, that indeed would be difficult. Her
life and occupations may, perhaps, be best delineated by representing
them as one vast bazar of interests, all equally claiming her
attention--"the court, the camp, the senate, and the field:" certainly
the field of Newmarket, where it is said she regulated her husband's
calculations and interests with great success.

These objects, and many more than these, which, as the charlatans say
at the end of their lists, are too tedious to mention, filled up the
life of this laborious and distinguished lady. Nor were her labours
less onerous in managing the government of the society of _ton_. Her
rule was there despotic--her word was law;--and if some few persons
pretended to step aside, not following the fashionable multitude in
bowing the knee to Baal, or ventured to think for themselves in the
circle in which she moved, immediately, as though by an enchanter's
wand, they were banished thence, and some more amalgamating spirit
was chosen to fill up the vacancy. There was a kind of air-gun fired,
which was sure to hit the mark, without betraying the hand that drew
the trigger: a sort of _lettre-de-cachet_, as effectual as those
promulgated in the times of Louis le Grand, which consigned to oblivion
the offending persons, while the victims themselves could not fathom
any cause or assign any particular reason for the sentence.

Nevertheless, in the very midst of this ruling and reigning, this
despotic sway in the court of _ton_, a secret dissatisfaction existed
in the breast of Lady Tilney. She, indeed, was one of those haughty
liberals who affect to despise kings and courts; not because they
dislike those necessary evils, as they call them, but because they are
themselves, or would be if they could, the greatest of all sovereigns.

Notwithstanding, therefore, the high ground of rank and situation
on which she stood, it rankled at her heart to have offended her
sovereign, and to feel herself an object of just dislike to him; for,
however great the magnanimity shewn to her on the occasion of her
offence, still to be aware that, under circumstances, she could no
longer be considered a favourite at court, was in itself a source of
the deepest mortification. Impressed with this consciousness, what was
to be done? Why, render all courts the subject of flippant raillery;
vote them and their sovereigns old-fashioned bores; erect herself into
a queen, and have a court of her own. In truth, this plan agreed better
with her self-love than any other; because sovereigns and courts, in as
far as regards the outward decorum of forms, regulate and keep society
in its proper course; whereas, under the sham dynasty of _ton_, caprice
bears rule, and tyranny in its worst sense marks the conduct of those
who sit on its ephemeral throne.

Connected with this system, the pride of ancestry too was necessarily
another subject of ridicule with Lady Tilney, who thought that those
who, on such grounds, pretended to take any lead in the world of
fashion, had much better retire to their castles, and there indulge in
dreams of their greatness.

Nor did Lady Tilney's thirst for power end with her effort for
universal dominion in matters of _ton_--she had another ambition,
that of leading and controlling the political party to which she had
attached herself. Here, however, her sway was more imaginary than real;
and often the long-headed politician, or crafty diplomate, as they
listened with apparent complacency to her advice, allowed her words
to fall unheeded on their ear, or laughed at her in secret. With the
young and uninformed aspirants in the career of political life, Lady
Tilney had, perhaps, more success; and many a rising scion of a noble
house has been known to adopt, under the influence of her smiles, and
from a foolish vanity of being noticed by her, a line of conduct quite
at variance with the wishes of their parents, and to the sacrifice of
their own best interests.

In this grasp at power, however successfully achieved, Lady Tilney felt
herself ill at ease--her mind was continually harassed by reflections
on the tottering and uncertain tenure of _ton_, and the possibility,
nay, probability, of some younger, newer person, climbing to the
envied seat which she then possessed. The fear of a certain Duchess
of Hermanton was constantly before her imagination, as the embodied
object of her alarm; and she considered it as a measure little short
of self-preservation, to secure her influence, if possible, on a still
firmer basis, by some decided act, or the invention of some fresh
folly. As to Almack's, that circle of exclusiveness had been polluted;
its brief course was run, and its brightness on the decline.

The more Lady Tilney reflected on the subject, the more she became
convinced of the expediency of her intentions; and determined,
therefore, to mature her plan immediately. Having despatched her notes
to the Comtesse Leinsengen, Lady Tenderden, and Lady Ellersby, she
commanded that no one should be admitted to her presence but themselves.

"Yet stay, Destouches," she added to the page, as she issued her
orders; "Prince Luttermanne by all means, should he call." And then,
having given audience to three cooks, four painters, two authors, an
authoress, and several milliners, she finished with advice to a poet
and a critique upon his work.

Lady Tilney, before the arrival of the personages she had written to
(for Lady Tilney knew the value of intervals), arranged her list of
engagements; tossing some into the fire--with the velocity of one well
practised in the weight, measure, and value of names; and examining
others of more importance. She determined to mar all that might
interfere with her own views in society.--"Mrs. Annesly, truly what
a griffin! and the Countess of Delamere, and Lady Melcombe!--but the
Marchioness of Borrowdale! that indeed requires attention." Lady Tilney
rang the bell--Destouches appeared in a minute--the peculiar hasty
touch of call was known to the well-appointed page. "Send Arquimbeaud
here!" and the distinguished Arquimbeaud soon obeyed the summons. "I
have determined to have a party, Arquimbeaud, next Thursday; see that
cards are issued for that day, according to this list."

As he withdrew, Comtesse Leinsengen was announced. The immense bonnet
and deep veil--the splendid cashmere and still long petticoats
(although they were generally worn very much shortened), afforded a
favourable costume to the lady who now advanced; certain defects were
thus concealed, and imagination might lend that delicacy of slimness
and form to the feet and ancles which pervaded the rest of the person,
but which did not characterize those of the Comtesse.

The rapid volubility of the one lady, and the sharp short sentences
of the other, began the conference. Lady Tilney placed the most
luxurious of all the luxurious chairs close to the fire, pushed
forward the screen, and with the eagerness of apparent friendship,
seemed to wish to make her visitor quite at home: or, as she expressed
it, "deliciously comfortable." "You have learned that word now,
dear Comtesse,--indeed you have adopted it; and there is no one who
understands the thing so perfectly as yourself."

Midst all these courtesies and courtings the Comtesse observed a
sort of abstracted air, though they were (and so far Lady Tilney was
sincere) things of course.

"My dear Comtesse, I am so glad we have a minute alone, to discuss
our plans. I have many things of consequence to say to you; but before
I begin I must speak to you of that horrible affair of poor Lady
Mailing's; it is quite impossible to support her any longer, for you
are aware her secret is publicly known. So long as she was prudent,
and observed appearances, it was all very well; but _now_ it will
be impossible for me to receive her. You know I never did receive
any body who placed themselves in a similar situation--not even my
own relations; my character has always been _intacte_, and I cannot
_compromète_ myself, though I am very sorry for poor Lady Mailing;
and had she only avoided this _esclandre_, and managed her affair
prudently, I would have stood by her to the end; but as it is--"

"Oh, certainly not," interrupted the Comtesse; "you must be conscious
that every one knows Lady Tilney's high reputation, and it would never
be supposed dat you would countenance a belle passion; vraiment, quand
on est tellement dupe as to sacrifice sa position dans le monde, to a
man's vanity, or to be playing de sentimentale at forty, it is quite
enough to make one sick, and she well deserves to be vat you call
blown. _Mais, de grâce_, do not let us prose more about her--_vat
sinifies?_"

"Oh, very true, and then there are other matters of so much greater
consequence to consider. Do you really think that this administration
will hold--you who are in all the secrets?--positively you must tell
me. I am sure if that man (lowering her voice to a whisper) is at the
head of affairs, all must go wrong--poor England! what will become of
you? But we will never allow that--shall we?"

"Oh! trève de politiques, ma chere, si vous m'aimez; it is a subject
quite marital, and therefore, you know, not at all in my way. What I
want to revolutionize, or rather to reform, is your state of society."

"Precisely, my dear Comtesse, it is the very subject on which I wished
to talk to you, when I wrote requesting to see you--you received my
note, did you not?"

"Oh, yes; but it is an affair on which we hold such very different
opinions. My maxim is, se bien amuser d'après sa propre volonté--that
is what I want to do; and to tell you the truth, I am ennuyé à la mort
in your London world--every thing is so stupid here! Vat signify dat
tiresome Almack, after all? It was good enough at first, when it put
people in a passion, et pendant que se faisoit fureur; but now that,
somehow or oder, you liberales admitted every petite demoiselle vid her
red elbows, and vulgar mama to take care of her, it has lost all its
character, and I positively intend to withdraw my name. Besides, de
lady patronesses cannot even maintain a seat at de top of de room--de
oder night I find Lady Melcombe and her daughter perch up in my seat;
and though I walked over them and stared them down, dey positively took
no hint, but sat still so comfortably vulgar it was quite provoking.
No, no, my dear, Almack's day is finish and de thing must fall--so
never stay by a falling friend; when a person or a ting begins to
totter, leave it."

"Very true," rejoined Lady Tilney; "there is much truth in what you
advise (and she looked very grave). But then, you know, my dear
Comtesse, you must consider the independence of our constitution--which
makes it very difficult--"

"Not to have a stupid society.--Agreed."

"But the great number of our nobility," rejoined Lady Tilney, "and the
weight and consequence of a still greater number of influential members
in the other house"----

"Renders all your pretences of a société choisie mere pretence."

"Pardon me, Comtesse, you have yourself owned that my parties are
select; and you yourself, although in a public situation, contrive
to leave out those who do not suit your purpose. After all, what can
tend more to the preservation of society?--than such impertinence" was
on Lady Tilney's tongue; but she checked herself, and added with a
little cough that gave time for reflexion: "What can tend more to the
maintenance of a société distinguée than the exercise of this choice,
made without reference to the rank or situation of the parties, but
merely dependent on the voice of the few who are formed to lead?"

"Very true," rejoined the Comtesse Leinsengen, "and if that system
was properly upheld, it is the only chance of not being _obsédé_ by
vulgars;--but you do not act upon it sufficiently. As to myself, I can
no long bear de whole ting; my health does not permit of your late
hours, and I generally go away when your company are beginning to
arrive. And then these great routs of your Duchess D'Hermantons and
your Ladi Borrowdales and Aveling, sont à dormir de bout."

"Agreed, my dear Comtesse, I do so agree with you; it is the very
matter I am longing to discuss with you. Do let us settle something
amongst ourselves, that shall rid us of all these evils, and establish
a _société à part_. I must tell you what I have already done to effect
this purpose. You know that odious Lady Borrowdale has one of her
everlasting At Homes next Thursday, to meet their Royal Highnesses the
---- as usual, that vulgar decoy; so I have therefore countermanded my
former invitations, and issued my cards for that very day--Nobody will
go there, will they?"

"Perhaps not many; and if some do, there are plenty left."

"Yes," said Lady Tilney, with ill-concealed anxiety, "but you know the
royalties always do accept her invitations."

"What matters dat--you do not care for royalties." For an instant
Lady Tilney's command of language was checked--she almost betrayed her
vexation, when fortunately the name of Lady Ellersby was announced,
whose dawdling drawl, as she entered the apartment, smoothed over the
asperities which began to mark the conversation, and which might have
rendered it in the end a little too _piquante_.

"My dear Lady Ellersby," said Lady Tilney, "how charmed I am to
see you. I was dying to meet you, to consult you, to enjoy your
entertaining society." The Comtesse Leinsengen smiled significantly, as
she said, "And so was I."

"Consult me! La--well, that is something quite new--nobody ever
consulted me; but pray explain what you mean."

"Oh! we want to establish some regulations by which our society shall
be distinguished, and which shall save us from the inroads of all these
people whom we are constantly meeting, and obliged to be civil to,
whether we will or no--in short, something that shall make us, as we
ought to be--a _race à part_."

"I thought," Lady Ellersby replied, "we always were that."--"To
be sure we were; but then, my dear, you know abuses will creep in,
and all constitutions require from time to time to be strengthened
or reformed, according to circumstances; and you know, my dear Lady
Ellersby, that we have all of us long since lamented that Almack's,
which was excellent in its way, has now, from the infringement on
its privileges, become quite corrupted from its original design, and
something positively must be done, or we shall be overwhelmed _en
masse_--something to stem this torrent, this inroad of Goths and
Vandals."

"Dear me, that sounds very alarming--you quite frighten me; I don' t
understand you--pray tell me what it is you propose."

"Why," answered Lady Tilney, "we wish to form a society entirely
to ourselves, which shall be quite exclusive--a society for which
we shall settle _d'avance_ every particular and qualification of
the persons who may be admitted to it. Thus you see (turning to the
Comtesse Leinsengen), my dear Comtesse, we shall never do any thing
but in concert with each other, and never invite any one but those who
entirely suit us. You understand me now, don't you?" addressing Lady
Ellersby.

"Oh dear, yes! I think I do."

"No, no, you do not understand her. Permettez--in one word I will
explain vat Lady Tilney mean to say: voici le mot de l'énigme--you are
all English, and though you do your _possible_ you cannot help being
English. You are all afraid in dis country to do vat you like best; and
though Lady Tilney propose to ask only de chosen few, you will none of
you do so in reality, take my word for dat. You talk freedom, but act
in chains. Now we, au contraire, _chez nous_--we women I mean--do de
freedom, and never tink of de chain at all; but whenever you ladies
make your lists for your parties for instance; den comes--dis is not
politic, _toder_ is not right,--dis is not my husband's pleasure; some
scarecrow or anoder is always driving you off de land of amusement. Now
you say you will open your doors only to those you like, and you are
right--dere is no oder secret for to make pleasant society; but you
will _not_ do it nevertheless, ladies, for you are all de cowards."

"Indeed, my dear Comtesse," rejoined Lady Tilney, "you will find
that we _shall_, though--and I think effectually; although there are
certain principles in our constitution which extend to the ruling even
of private life--and these the wives of certain nobles cannot wholly
overlook." Comtesse Leinsengen shrugged her shoulders.

"Ah, dear, it is as I thought, you are de woman I like best in dis
country; but you are all over shackle, up to de ear in de _qu'en dira
t'on_! De plebe ought to be made of de noble's opinion, not de noble
constrained to dat of de vulgar."

"That may do very well with you," rejoined Lady Tilney, "but with us
as an unqualified maxim it will never do. I grant, Comtesse, all that
you say can be done in one's own house, where one makes one's own laws
and rules in one's own way: so far it is only asserting one's own right
to liberty, and as far as we can persuade people to be of the same way
of thinking it is all right. But I have too much liberty in my heart to
desire to tyrannize as you suggest; and, in fine, confess myself too
much of an Englishwoman to wish to see your system prevailing amongst
us."

Lady Tilney said this in a tone of English pride, which proved that she
had not forgotten all that was best worth remembering, although it was
in contradiction to the spirit of what had fallen from her a moment
before.

Lady Tilney, however, dealt largely in contradiction at all times. The
Countess Ellersby smiled; the Comtesse Leinsengen again shrugged her
shoulders, drew her shawl around her, and was preparing to depart,
saying, "Well! mes chères dames, I leave you to the enjoyment of your
liberty, and have done."

"But I have not done," said Lady Tilney; "I am determined we shall
have a society that shall be quite our own, and yet not subversive of
principles we must uphold. (Another shrug of the shoulders.) Allow me
to say, that if you, Comtesse, and you, my dear Lady Ellersby, will
but second me, I am sure we shall not fail, and I know I may reckon on
Prince Luttermanne co-operating with us;--so far so good."

"And Princesse Luttermanne?" inquired Lady Ellersby.

"Oh, for the prince's sake we must have her," replied the Comtesse
Leinsengen, "D'ailleurs, _dans ma position_, it could not be
oderwise--in all cases we must pass over des inconveniens--besides she
is good-humoured, and has _her own fry to fish_, and will not trouble
us much."

Lady Ellersby and Lady Tilney looked at each other, and laughed. "And
then," observed Lady Tilney, "we have Princesse de la Grange, and
Mrs. Kirchoffer; we must enrol them on our list (although they are
sufficiently insipid), because they can be useful, and dare not act
but in subserviency to _us_. But, Lady Boileau, what shall we do with
her? She indeed has a will of her own, and she has a mother very much
_de trop_, whom however she treats cavalierly enough (of which, by the
way, I do not approve); but, notwithstanding, I think we must have her,
though we can by no means be troubled with the mama."

"Certainment pas," cried the Comtesse, "for the Irish mama with her
vulgar repartee would give a mauvaise tournure to de whole society."

"There you are right; and while we admit the daughter, remember, it
is only on sufferance, just on the same footing as we admit Mrs.
Kirchoffer, and as I propose that we should also do Lady de Chere and
Lady Hamlet Vernon, and----"

"Mais, que faire de la jeune lady," interrupted the Comtesse, "qui
parmi un certain set is a good deal de vogue, Ladi--Ladi,--vat you name
her?"

"What, Lady Baskerville?" asked Lady Tilney; and then replied, "Oh
she must be one of us, to be sure, for I think we can make use of
her--she only longs to be in the fashion, and her husband also. Flatter
their vanity, and you do with them what you chuse; make them believe
they are of the _ton_, and you have them at command."

"Well, den, now you have named all de ladies I suppose, and dere is but
one cavalier; do you mean us to be a convent, and have no gentlemen?"

"By no means, my dear Comtesse; of course there will be all our
husbands." Here the Comtesse Leinsengen had recourse to her usual
expressive gesture of contempt. "And then," proceeded Lady Tilney,
"there is the Duke of Mercington, Lord Raynham, Lord Tonnerre, Leslie
Winyard, and Frank Ombre,--Spencer Newcombe,--and we must not forget
Lord Glenmore; though I wish he were more decided in his political
creed. Besides we cannot omit Lord Albert D'Esterre, whom we must
have on probation, for he is young and only just returned from the
Continent; but they say he is very clever, and I think may in time
become one of us. But, ere we decide further on the gentlemen, we must
consult Prince Luttermanne."

"Ah! bon chere ladi" (with a nod of approval). "Quite so," added Lady
Ellersby, languidly; "for, though he is called good-humoured, he can
be as cross as is necessary. I never saw any body _walk over people_
better than he does."

Lady Tilney, who had been for the last minute or two busily employed
with her pen setting down the names which she had just mentioned,
interrupted Lady Ellersby, saying, "By the bye, there is one rule very
necessary to be observed, which I am sure we shall all agree in; that
is, to admit no unmarried ladies, unless something very particular
indeed should make us waive our resolve. When I say this, I do not,
of course, mean to _balls_; but I mean to those coteries which will
in fact constitute the élite of our society. And then I propose that
we none of us go to the old-established dullifications; but, on their
nights, each one of us must in turn take care to chuse that same
evening for our coteries."

"Dat vill do very well for de Lady Borrowdale, and de Lady Aveling,
and dat old Marchioness--vat you call her--Feuille morte; but La
Duchesse D'Hermanton, vat vill you do vid her? it is not so easy to
_take dat lionne par la barbe_."

"Oh," rejoined Lady Tilney, for this was a name she feared to offend,
"the Duchess is not one of us, it is true; but we need only walk once
a year through her apartments; and we can bear that--besides, she is
a sort of person" (apart)--and Lady Tilney broke off abruptly from a
subject, in itself always disagreeable to her.

"And now," she went on to say, "having formed the outline of our plan,
we have only to follow it up, and I am sure it will be successful. I
wonder Prince Luttermanne and Lady Tenderden are not come, for I wrote
to them both; and I should have liked that we talked the matter over
altogether. However, I cannot doubt but they will agree with us in our
arrangements; and if you, dear Comtesse, and you Lady Ellersby, will
see Princesse de la Grange and Mrs. Kirchoffer, and Lady Baskerville,
I will take care to speak to the other parties. Of course I shall see
Prince Luttermanne some time or other this day, and Lady Tenderden,
for they must have received my notes; and I will settle with him about
our gentlemen." Then addressing the Comtesse, she added, "I need not,
I am sure, remind you, who are so discreet, that the success of every
thing which is to produce éclat depends upon the secret combination of
the movements; and therefore, in speaking to the different parties,
pray impress on their minds the absolute necessity of privacy, and
not to let our designs be known beforehand by a premature publication
of them, but rather let them be developed by their effect; and when
their existence will have been confirmed beyond the possibility of
counteraction."

"Assurement laissez moi faire."--And here Lady Ellersby, looking at
her watch, started from her chair, saying, "Dear me! I had no notion
it was so late. I had an appointment with my Lord, and it is past the
time. Bless me! what shall I do?" Then making her adieu, with more
vivacity than was her custom, she departed in greater haste than she
was ever known to do before.

"Who _is her_ Milord just now?" asked Comtesse Leinsengen.

"Oh fie! malicieuse," replied Lady Tilney.

"Is it again dat little consequential personage who looks like a
perdrix santé aux truffes? I fancy I saw something like a réchauffé
getting up between them de oder night at Lady De Chere's."

"Now really, my dear Comtesse, I must defend my friend. People are
always so ill-natured--one must have some cavalier, you know, to walk
about with in public--and scandal always ascribes evil where none
exists. No, no; Lady Ellersby has too charming a husband for this to
gain credit for a moment." The Comtesse's usual shrug implied comme
vous voulez, and she added, "it is truly extraordinary how any body can
call dat ladi handsome, vid her drawn mouth and peevish expression!"

"Surely she has a sweet smile?"--"When it is not a bitter one,"
rejoined the Comtesse; "but what _sinifies_? she does very well for
what she is good for. Now I must go, and you must be de active agent in
settling our Lady Parliament; as for me, I will have a sinecure post."

"You are quite delightful, Comtesse, and ought to have every thing
your own way; so good bye, if you _must_ go. I will remember to see
Prince Luttermanne; I will not let the matter rest--adieu," and they
kissed each other's cheeks on both sides, "adieu!"--"You will not
let de matter rest--no, I am sure you will not--nor any oder ting
or person," thought the Comtesse, as she glided out of the room.
"How frightfully red her nose is become," observed Lady Tilney,
soliloquizing, as she looked at her own smooth cream-coloured skin in
the glass.




CHAPTER II.

CHARACTERISTICS.


Of Lady Tilney's character a hasty outline has been attempted in the
preceding chapter; falling short, however, as it is confessed every
attempt must do, to delineate all its varied features. Something,
however, may have been gathered, by viewing her in the midst of the
group assembled in her boudoir; and the portraiture will be rendered
still more distinct, as the character of her associates are further
developed.

Of Lady Tilney herself it may be said, that that real or pretended
contempt of rank which she affected to entertain, arose from the
circumstances of her own parentage, which, on her mother's side
at least, was not noble; to the same cause, also, may perhaps be
attributed her anxious irritability, ill concealed under a forced
gaiety, lest the respect and homage which she considered to be her
due, should not be paid her. There was a restlessness in her assumed
tranquillity, wholly unlike the easy natural languor of her friend Lady
Ellersby, to which she would gladly have attained, and which it was
always the object of her ambition to imitate; but she never reached
that perfectibility of _insouciance_, which marks a superiority of
birth and station.

Notwithstanding the part which she consequently was obliged to play,
there was still a good deal of nature in her composition; much more
than in that of the person whose demeanour she envied;--and had not her
character been influenced by a life of dissipation, she seemed designed
to have passed through existence diffusing usefulness and cheerfulness
around her. Much might be said in extenuation of Lady Tilney's faults
and follies, courted and caressed as she was; as indeed there is
ever much indulgence to be extended to all who, in situations of
power and of temptation (however many their foibles) remain free from
positive vice. The voice of censure should be guarded therefore in its
condemnation; remembering that the inability to do wrong, or the want
of allurement to yield to it, are often the sole preservatives against
similar errors.

In commenting upon such characters as Lady Tilney's, it is not for the
purpose therefore of attaching blame to the defects of the individual,
so much as to point out the dangers attendant on their peculiar
stations, and to shew how far even noble natures are liable to be
debased by constant exposure to a baneful influence. Were not this the
object of a writer, idle and contemptible indeed would be the pen,
which could waste its powers in tracing the vanities and follies of a
race which always has existed in some shape or other, and possibly will
always continue to do so.

There is an indulgence of spleen, a silly gossiping espionage, which
delights in prying into the faults of others, without any motive but
that of the gratification of its own mean nature--but there is an
investigation into the habits and manners of the actors in the scene
of fashionable folly, which, by dispelling the illusion, may preserve
others from being heedlessly drawn into the vortex of so dangerous
a career. A sermon would not, could not, descend from its sacred
dignity, to effect this--a philosophical or moral discourse, would have
as little chance of working such an end;--but a narrative of actual
occurrences may perhaps give warning of a peril, which is the greater
because it bears outwardly, and on a cursory view, no appearance of
future evil; for to the young, and indeed to all, there is a charm,
and a very great charm too, in being something superior, something
that others are not, or cannot be. No one acquainted with human
nature will ever contradict this. The question of vital importance
to be asked is--In what ought this distinction to consist? and what
will really give it? Certainly _not_ a life of dissipation, in which
the affectation of new modes and manners constitute the business of
existence; certainly _not_ the sacrifice of moral and religious duty,
to a courting of frivolous homage and the pursuit of an empty _éclat_.

These, however, it is to be feared, are more generally the spurious
objects of ambition with persons in fashionable life, than the solid
advantages, and lasting fame, which their situations afford them the
means of securing. And if it is thus with the world of fashion in
general, how much more was it the case in the circle in which Lady
Tilney reigned! Herself and her friends had no thought that tended to
any specific moral purpose, in the strict sense of the word. The duties
that were performed, were such only in a negative sense; they went to
church, they lived with their husbands; some of them, but not all, had
escaped scandal; they were fond mothers, at least in the eye of _their_
world; they were alive to their offsprings' interests, at least their
worldly interests; and beyond this, it is to be feared, neither for
them, or for themselves, did their views extend.

Here may be closed the catalogue of their moral possessions. Of their
outward shew of manner and courtesy, where so much in a _soi-disant_
empire of ton might be expected, perhaps, there was still less to
praise: a _brusquerie_ of address took place of polished breeding,
where intimacy permitted any address at all; and where none was
allowable, an insolent carelessness marked the behaviour, instead of
that polite courtesy which is ever the distinguishing mark of really
good manners.

Lady Tilney, had she not stood on the 'vantage ground of _ton_, might
have been called vulgar: the loud and incessant talking, the abrupt and
supercilious glance and motion, had it not been backed by title and an
assumed superiority, would have been designated by a very different
name from that under which her manners passed current; and even as
it was, they sometimes received a reproof which, however affectedly
scorned, was deeply felt. An instance of this occurred on the occasion
of her receiving the homage of a distinguished foreigner; when, in the
intoxication of the moment's vanity, Lady Tilney forgot the respect
due to one of exalted station, rudely turning her back, and brushing
past him in the dance, a disregard of etiquette which he whose manners
are all elegance and condescension, would never in his station have
shewn to the meanest of his subjects, and whose sense of delicacy and
propriety is so acute, that wherever female manners are concerned, none
could better know how to condemn whatever derogated in the slightest
degree from them.

It was to the displeasure incurred by this circumstance, and to the
loss of favour which all who have ever lived in its sunshine cannot
fail to lament when withdrawn, that allusion was made, in speaking of
Lady Tilney's contempt of sovereigns and courts. Here was to be found
one bad effect of a system which, while false in every sense, arrogated
to itself perfection in all.

There was no immorality to rebuke in this instance of Lady Tilney's
conduct; but it proceeded from a source, which if not in her, in others
at least, might be productive of serious consequences; namely, from a
contempt of established rules and received opinions; and if, in the
midst of this arrogance there was a redeeming spirit of occasional
kindness,--a smile which took the heart captive for the moment, and
gave promise of better things,--it only caused a regret that the good
which was there should be thus choaked by the noxious weeds of vanity.

Some of Lady Tilney's companions in _ton_ had not, like her, escaped
the breath of slander; one or more were supposed to have listened,
at least, to that corruptive voice of gallantry, which withers the
bloom and freshness of a married woman's reputation; whose error is
remembered long after its cause has passed away--let it have been real
or imaginary;--in either case the effect on a woman's character is
the same. It is in vain that in a certain sphere there exists a tacit
agreement to pass by, and gloss over such defamatory tales; the persons
coming under their degrading mark have a seal set upon them, which,
in spite of themselves, and maugre the usage of _their_ world, is
nevertheless destructive of peace; and it requires little penetration
to see beneath the forced smiles which are put on with the adornments
of the toilette, the gnawing worm that preys upon the heart.

The fatal effects of such errors attach only to those guilty of
them; the feeling inspired for their situation would be one of pure
commiseration; but, alas! the influence of example is contagious,
and whatever is felt for the individual who thus errs, the sentence
of condemnation must go forth against the crime. In regard to the
other members who formed Lady Tilney's intimate circle, the Countess
Tenderden, Princesse de la Grange, Lady de Chere, and Lady Boileau,
for instance, there was equal matter for remark, varying with the
character of each. The first of these, possessing nothing decided in
her composition, had been, from the commencement, a follower in the
track of others, and it was owing to this laziness of disposition that
she became the ready and obedient slave of fashionable command, as well
as from her early initiation into the secrets of _ton_, rather than
from any other cause, that she held the place she did in Lady Tilney's
estimation.

Lady Tenderden's unsatisfactory and frivolous existence had thus
been passed without any decided plan, except that of being generally
impertinent, and of courting personal admiration; which, when it is
paid to beauty alone, ceases with the first cessation of youth: the
consciousness of which fact added no genuine sweetness to the smile of
Lady Tenderden; but left her, although in the possession of most of the
outward circumstances which could grace existence, with a fading person
and a dissatisfied mind.

Princesse de la Grange was a star in the midst of this false galaxy
of _ton_, in as much as a strict regard to married duty, and a
preservation of moral and religious principle, gave to her character
a superior brightness; but whether from the taint of the poisonous
air she breathed, or from a defect of strength of mind, or from the
situation she filled, or from all these circumstances combined, the
Princesse de la Grange did not escape entirely the pollution of folly,
and she too delighted in the vanity of being exclusive.

In the love of being distinguished above her compeers, Lady de Chere,
however, far excelled; attaining a perfection which her exceedingly
clever and powerful understanding, together with the management of her
conduct, and an appearance of general decorum, enabled her to preserve.
Nor were her moral qualities alone conducive to her success: she had
besides the advantage of being able to set her face like a flint
(which indeed it resembled physically), and she deemed all emotion or
all expression of natural feeling (even that of bodily kind) to be a
weakness unworthy of a woman of fashion. Lady de Chere was once known
on an occasion of personal suffering, when a few tears actually escaped
her, to have exclaimed to her attendant: "You are the first person in
the world who have ever seen me guilty of such weakness." Nay, she even
carried this perfection of induration so far, as to boast of having cut
her own mother.

In this last instance of the perfectibility of _ton_, Lady Boileau
yielded not the palm--she had remained a good many more years than she
had bargained for, unmarried--she had studied under a mother, whose
lessons eventually were but too well rewarded in kind. This mother,
however, had loved _her_; and with much and unremitting labour, had
effected for her an alliance of title--of wealth. What more could
either of them with their views desire?

Lady Marchmont had established her daughter greatly, and the daughter
had accepted the marriage upon certain calculations: such as being
her own mistress, independent of her husband, or her mother; who knew
too well _de quel bois elle se chauffoit_, for Lady Boileau to like
her surveillance. Lady Boileau had then made no scruple of swearing
to love, honour, and obey him whom she loved _not_, held _cheap_, and
determined to _resist_. But these words, and too many more, bear a
totally different signification, it is well known, in the language of
_ton_, from what they do in their common acceptation.

One of the first steps of Lady Boileau after her marriage, was to
gain admission into the circle of Lady Tilney on a footing of intimacy;
for although she had been on visiting terms with her, yet she was aware
that the mere interchange of cards did not constitute her the friend
or protégé of Lady Tilney, to which distinction she aspired. There
were one or two circumstances, however, which rendered the attainment
of this object rather difficult. In the first place, Lady Boileau had
a mother whom it would require more decided measures to detach from
her than, as it has been seen, Lady Tilney chose to countenance. The
general tenour of her conduct, too, was a thing yet unproved, and
it was, therefore, still unascertained how far she might be true to
their _esprit du corps_, and be worthy of admission into this circle.
Lady Boileau was considered, notwithstanding these impediments, to
be a person of promise, and she was accordingly admitted, with the
tacit understanding, however, that she was not to push Lady Marchmont
indiscreetly on the scene; where her wit and plain speaking might break
forth in corruscations too potent for the _tendre demi-jour_, or rather
darkness, in which the proceedings of the _ton par excellence_ were
invariably to be veiled.

There was, however, one person whose name has not yet figured in the
catalogue, but whose character of mixed good and evil, would require
a powerful pencil to delineate; for the many amalgamating tints which
united and harmonised its opposing lights and shades were any thing
but an easy task to give--divested of these, the portrait would become
caricature. How often does marriage, especially in early life, give a
colour to the future conduct of women. Had Lady Hamlet Vernon married
differently, she was possessed of qualities which would have rendered
her estimable as well as amiable; and was mistress of talents which,
if properly directed and matured, would have rendered her a being
distinguished above her sex. But this was not so; she had married for
situation, and soon found the burthen she had imposed upon herself far
outweighed the advantages she had contemplated in the step she had
taken. Unhappiness was the first natural result; and in the absence of
religious principle, young, beauteous, and fascinating, she soon found
in the universal admiration paid her, a delusive balm to alleviate
the society of a husband considerably older than herself, and who had
married her from the pride of calling a person so admired his own.
Under these circumstances, Lady Hamlet Vernon could not remain without
the stigma of slander attaching to her.

The early demise, however, of Lord Hamlet Vernon liberated her from
the hazard of her situation, and at five-and-twenty she found herself
again free. Titled, and with great wealth at her command, she was
too clever for the empty votaries of folly, but too clever also to
be entirely set aside by them. She was, at the same time, too much
_sujetté à caution_ to be admitted on terms of unguarded intimacy
amongst those in her own sphere who were observers of religious and
moral conduct, and who happily form the aggregate of distinguished
society in England. Left without choice, therefore, as to who should
be her associates, Lady Hamlet Vernon was drawn into a society where
the errors of her early conduct were, by the contagion of example, sure
to be confirmed, and the remainder of any good principles that she
might have possessed, in danger of being subverted; for it was not the
least evil arising out of the system of the society alluded to, that
the persons composing it were under a compact of exclusion of all who
differed from them in habit and opinions; and, thus deprived of the
power of comparison, their own conduct wanted that useful touchstone of
its rectitude.

We are all alive to impressions daily made upon us; and if a life of
carelessness and dissipation is not to be checked by an occasional
example of what is truly excellent and worthy in character, the moral
perception between right and wrong of its mistaken votaries will soon
be blunted, till at last both their ears and eyes are closed to all
remonstrance. The riper in years, therefore, were sure to have their
false estimate of life confirmed; _they_ could not return on their
steps, even if they wished it; while the young and the inconsiderate
were taught to believe, that those who had so long followed in that
destructive but glittering career, were the only objects worthy of
imitation, and in their turn became hardened actors in the scene.
Although the characters hitherto produced as slaves to this system
have been of the weaker sex alone, still let it not be imagined that
they were its only victims, or that they alone played their part in
upholding it.

If possible, the men of the society were many of them as frivolous, and
more vicious; and, though here and there might be found a character
that, from family connection or ignorance of the tendency of the
society, mingled in its contamination without infection, or making a
wreck of principle, yet, far from these solitary instances detracting
from the general truth of what has been said, it will be found that
such persons, the moment they became aware of the lurking evil, broke
from it abruptly; though perhaps, saving themselves with difficulty
from the entanglement.

In the members, however, which swelled the list of the male part
of this circle, few indeed were there who ever made an effort to
withdraw from it. Vice and folly, in manners and in dress--male
coquetry--ineffable impertinence--ignorance--detraction of virtue
which might have resisted, or talents which eclipsed them--insipidity
in mind, and effeminacy in person--devotion to luxury,--these, and
more than these, if such could be catalogued, of the immoralities
and follies of man, were all to be found here, in degree and kind,
revolving in their different orbits--and fulfilling their allotted
parts in the system, till their existence closed. What though wit
might sometimes play around their board, or the quick repartee enliven
the monotonous circle of the evening--what though talent might be
allowed, for a brief season, to expatiate on higher topics, and the
deep discourse of great human learning might be suffered to dwell at
intervals on subjects more intellectual--yet what profited this to
those who listened or to those who spoke?--The moment's amusement, the
indulgence of mere curiosity, the establishing of some political tenet
or philosophical dogma, were alone the objects looked to. Talents, when
found in this society, were in fact directed to none but _worldly_
views; and the feeling which should have guided their possessors to
acknowledge the bounty of the Author who bestowed them, and a faithful
employment of his gifts, was not only wanting, but the sacred religion
of that very Author was too frequently made an exercise for them--a
subject of their scorn or cavil.

Though untitled, yet of noble family, there was one, who figured
first as most licentious and unprincipled among the devotees of _ton_.
He was handsome, winning, specious; but he concealed under this
attractive exterior a heart of the blackest dye; no sense of right or
wrong checked its impulses. All to him was lawful that was attainable.
Pleasure was his object; and he had sailed down the short voyage of
his life unchecked by any of those reverses, unscared by any of those
feelings of shame or compunction, which would have operated on a weaker
mind; and if, for a moment, some enormity of conduct made the more
timid--they could not be called the more virtuous--of his associates
recoil, the hardened face, the laugh of carelessness, the ready excuse,
soon dissipated these transient feelings of shame; and patronized,
courted, upheld, in that true _esprit de corps_ which bound each member
of the society to protect the other, his youthful career had been run
from excess to excess.

Although a person whose weight and influence in themselves were not
great, yet he formed from his habits and opinions, and the talents
which (though perverted) he really possessed, one of those ties in
a fabric, which being multiplied, keep the whole body compact; and,
having once obtained a footing in Lady Tilney's circle, it followed,
as a matter of course, that he should be employed in that remodelling
of her society, which it has been seen Lady Tilney was so anxious
to effect, and his name therefore was not forgotten in the list,
concerning which she intended to consult Prince Luttermanne.

It is well for human nature, that many characters such as have been
just described are not often found; it certainly had no compeer in the
circle in which it moved. And though the folly of dress--the waste of
time--the uselessness of life--indulgence in the excess of luxury, are
errors and faults that cannot be too strongly held up to animadversion,
yet they are, by comparison, of a venial kind. Their effects, however,
ultimately do not prove such; for degradation of intellect must
follow a course of indolence, and an obtuseness of conscience must
be the consequence of long-neglected duties. Let it not be supposed,
therefore, that because Lord Boileau, Lord Baskerville, Lord Marchmont,
or Lord Tonnerre, were younger and less matured in a vicious course
than another, that therefore their conduct was less deserving of moral
censure--the seed that is sown in spring time will grow up to the
harvest, and it must be reaped accordingly. The pursuits of a careless
life of pleasure, the gaming-table, the society of opera dancers, the
intrigues of _ton_, are not preparations for the maintenance of family
consequence and wealth, still less for the fulfilment of the duties of
married life, the protection of a wife's conduct, or the education of
their offspring. Yet these, it is to be feared, were the sole objects
of Lord Boileau, of his companions, and of many others.

Besides these, however, there were characters intended to be included
in Lady Tilney's arrangements of a far different complexion, and the
very reverse of their inexistence--there were noble politicians, whose
lives were passed in any thing but inactivity; there were titled wits,
whose places were any thing but sinecures; poets, whose lays found
frequent subjects in the galaxy of beauty that surrounded them; and
painters, whose talents and winning flatteries constituted their patent
of nobility. The admission of all the latter personages was a decided
evidence of Lady Tilney's supremacy; for, with few exceptions, she
alone considered that to be surrounded by talents was essential to high
station, since with the generality of her coterie, the idea of mingling
intellect in their pleasures, was rather to destroy than heighten them.

Lady Tilney, however, in the end prevailed, and no society of _ton_
was in future considered complete without those appendages. But even
Lady Tilney's command of the suffrage of talents was not always
absolute; and once, it is said, a man of holy profession, whose
celebrity in his calling had led the London world in crowds to be his
auditors, though thrice bidden to the shrine of fashion, declined, with
steady consistency, to form one of a circle whose conduct in life it
was his duty to reprove.

It is not to be supposed that the list of cavaliers is yet full with
the names of the persons just alluded to; there were many others too
insignificant to bear designation--and enough of portraits. Catalogues
of these can only be interesting to a few curious collectors, and are
very unsatisfactory to the generality of persons. It is living with the
actors on the shifting scene, which can alone, for any length of time,
engage the attention, or be productive of any just understanding of the
character. To note down their actions as they occur, and to develope
the system by which their lives are regulated, will be the easiest, as
well as the most profitable task; for although there may be something
which at first appears unnatural, and scarcely to be recognised as
truth, in the idea that there exists a regular and defined system in
lives, which at a hasty glance seem spent in the careless manner of
the persons represented, nevertheless it is so--and there is a depth
in their folly, which requires to be sounded,--there is a mischief
in their apparent carelessness, which it is wise to detect--there is
a principle of latent evil under this seeming incipiency of conduct,
which requires to be unfolded, and shewn in its true colours.




CHAPTER III.

AN OLD-FASHIONED ASSEMBLY.


Although the outlines of Lady Tilney's project had been generally
settled, yet some of its details were still wanting; and in the
interval, she determined on one of those movements in the game, which a
crafty adversary sometimes makes to cover an ultimate and deeper end.
The Marchioness of Feuillemerte held one of her assemblies, and as it
was admissible to appear in such a circle once at least during the
season, _sans se compromettre_, Lady Tilney devoted herself for that
evening to the unpalatable task, and engaged Lady Ellersby to meet her.

After casting a glance of inquiry round the room, "My dear," said she,
"did you ever in your life see such an heterogeneous multitude (she
loved long, hard words) as are assembled here?"

"No, except here"--"Figures," continued Lady Tilney, "_renouvellés des
Grecs_--creatures dug out of Herculaneum, only not so elegant; all
George the Third's court I believe; and then such a tiresome eternity
of royalty, persons who never die, and whom Lady Feuillemerte, and Lady
Borrowdale have preserved, together with themselves, in spirits, I
believe, to exhibit on their great nights."

"Yes," rejoined Mr. Frank Ombre, who had been permitted to overhear
the whisper, and smiling with one of those doubtful expressions which
might do for tragic or for comic effect, "we do not want royalty
now to keep us in order,--that is quite an obsolete idea. No, we
have more enlarged views; we like to turn every thing, _sans dessus
dessous_--don't we Lady Tilney? I am sure I had rather bow to the
sceptre of your beauty, than to that of any prince or princess--and you
know I never flatter." At that moment a royal personage entered the
assembly, when Lady Tilney, under pretence of going away, hurried to
the door, saying, "oh, do let me avoid this _seccatura_."

"Do, Mr. Spencer Newcombe," addressing this privileged friend of her
own circle who stood near her, "do call my carriage,"--in the meanwhile
placing herself in a situation that made it impossible, without
rudeness, for the person whose approach she would have appeared to
shun, to pass her by unregarded; a behaviour which, however consistent
with Lady Tilney's ill breeding, when she wished to shew dislike, was
never known to attach to any of the family who were the objects of her
pretended contempt.

Lady Tilney did not, on the present occasion, make her arrangements
in vain, and was not only spoken to, but held so long in conversation
by the royal person who entered, that she had the satisfaction of
hearing her carriage repeatedly announced, till every individual of
the assembly must have been aware of the cause of her delay. The dense
crowd, however, which now encircled the prince, seemed to oppress
Lady Tilney, and affecting to be almost overcome by the pressure,--a
pressure which in fact she was herself causing, by obstinately keeping
her place, and not allowing the conversation to drop--she was at length
gratified by an offer of the arm of royalty to lead her to a seat, on
which she sank affectedly, while the prince took that next to her. In
one of the pauses of conversation which ensued, Mr. Ombre chanced to
find himself exactly at the back of Lady Tilney's chair, and she took
an opportunity of whispering to him, "how tiresome!" He shrugged his
shoulders, and replied in her ear, "I pity you from the bottom of my
heart," (adding aside to Spencer Newcombe), "As I do every one who
always succeeds in every thing they wish."

Shortly after, the prince rose to depart to speak to others, while
Lady Tilney having made good her right to royal attention, now prepared
to express her contumely of every thing regal, and to resume the
exercise of her own right to absolute power in her own person.

"Do, Mr. Ombre, sit down and let me have a _little_ real conversation
with you, for I am sick of all the _fadaises_ which have just passed."
"What a fortunate man," he rejoined, "shall I be, if I have only a
_little_ conversation with Lady Tilney!--you know I never flatter,--and
besides that distinction, a seat,"--dropping carelessly into the one
that was vacant.

But Lady Tilney did not read these words otherwise than in the sense
to which they were agreeable to her, and immediately her hitherto
repressed eloquence broke forth.

"Have you read the Male Coquet? Do tell me, is it not exquisite? Among
all the trash heaped upon people of fashion, this alone is well done.
It must be confessed that, in spite of its severity, the whole is well
drawn, and though highly coloured, not a daub."

"Yes, I have read it, and I like it; but the world don't."

"No! well I cannot conceive why--perhaps you can tell me.--Not like
it! indeed you surprise me! Why, it has already gone through three
editions."

"Yes, in the advertisements! but they say the publisher is ruined,
nevertheless."

"Well! that is quite extraordinary! I thought all the world approved
it."

"The world!--the world, my dear Lady Tilney, is a very ill-natured
world, though you have never found it so; but you will some day."

"Oh, do not imagine," cried Lady Tilney, a little displeased at her
supposed want of discernment, "do not suppose that I am not quite aware
of the world's ill-nature--only--"

"Only you are bound, my dear friend, to suppose it otherwise, since, in
its opinion of you, it does indeed make an exception."

"You know I hate flattery, Mr. Ombre."--"Well, well, I have done; but
in some cases, what appears flattery, is truth. Besides, I never _do
flatter_."

"Come, come," said Lady Tilney, "never mind! let us return to the Male
Coquet, I have not half done talking about it. What do you think of
the character of Lord Algernon, is it not delightful, is it not quite
perfect?--And for that very reason, quite detestable."

"My dear lady, I never knew but one perfect person in the world whom I
could bear; do you guess who I mean?"

"Dear me, are you still here?" said Lady Ellersby, approaching at the
moment.

"Yes--you know when those royalties _will_ talk to one,
it is impossible to get away."--"Ah, true--and it is so
fatiguing."--"Royalties--dose royalties, and you mind _dem_?" said the
Comtesse Leinsengen, who had caught Lady Tilney's words as she passed,
leaning on the arm of the Minister for Foreign Affairs.

"My dear Lady Tilney, I wonder to see _you_ here--but you always do de
reverse of what you talk, you know--I tell your so."

Lady Tilney was embarrassed, and looked around for an escape from
the conversation. She saw the half-formed sentence preparing by Lord
Rainham; which, however, she knew must undergo the necessary process
of preorganization and arrangement before it was addressed to her.
Luckily the Comtesse Leinsengen pressed forward before this could take
place, and Lady Tilney, to avoid any more sarcasm on her inconsistency,
willingly allowed for once the witty Lord to pass without a word. Mr.
Ombre, who was still by her side, and had lost nothing of the scene,
gave his word of consolation to Lady Tilney, as he remarked:

"How appropriate to the situation which he fills;--the ready orator,
the decided projector of measures and expedients,--how truly great a
minister! You know, Lady Tilney, I never flatter. I really think so."
Lady Tilney had no wish to continue the subject, and turning to Lady
Ellersby, remarked,

"Did you ever see such jewels as the Duchess of Hermanton's? How
vulgar to wear them in such quantities; she is like a walking
chandelier. But, look, there is Lord Arlingford; he is coming this
way--I want to speak to him, and if you move a step or two forward, I
shall be able to do so." Lord Arlingford was accordingly arrested on
his passage, for he had not intended to converse with Lady Tilney, but
was looking on towards a group of persons, in the midst of whom stood
the Duchess of Hermanton. "Well, Lord Arlingford, how surprised I am to
see _you_ here; are you not bored to death?"

"Why, Lady Tilney," he asked, in return, "should you be surprised to
see me in an assembly to which half London is invited?"

"That is precisely the reason," she replied, "I should have thought you
never went to these sort of things; they are very tiresome, and I am
sure you must be dreadfully annoyed."

Lord Arlingford was not an apt _élève_ of Lady Tilney's, although his
high rank and connexions had made her sedulously endeavour to direct
his education in the world of _ton_ from his very first _début_.

"Pardon me, not in the least _ennuyé_. I do not come often enough, or
remain long enough in these places, to be sickened by the shew--and
_as_ a shew, it is a very splendid one, and I like to see so much
beauty as is here to-night gather together."

"Fewer at a time," said Lady Tilney, "would be more agreeable, I should
think."

"Perhaps so, for habitual private society; but then that is quite
another affair: all things are good in their way, and in their proper
season and measure." Lady Tilney was mortified at this very rational
distinction of the indocile Lord, but went on to say, "At least you
will allow that a circle more _choisie_ is preferable--and one comes
to this sort of mob only as a kind of disagreeable duty."--"Duty! that
is quite a new idea of duty to me--but I am happy to be taught by so
fair an instructress." As he spoke, Lord Arlingford's grave countenance
(for it was a countenance of gravity for so young a man) relaxed into
something like vivacity; and Lady Tilney, profiting by the momentary
gleam of expression, requested him to assist her through the crowd, in
order that she might speak to the Duchess of Hermanton.

"You will come, will you not, Lady Ellersby?" turning her head over
her shoulder as she spoke.

"No (for at this moment the Duke of Mercington was coming towards her),
I have already seen the Duchess." Lady Tilney would then have lingered,
glad to have exchanged the arm on which she leant for that of the man
of still higher rank; but the Duke only making her the acknowledgment
of a familiar nod, offered his arm to Lady Ellersby, and as her friend
walked away in a contrary direction, Lady Tilney, mortified, bit her
lip, and was obliged to proceed.

The crowd in the door-way soon stopped her progress, and turning to her
companion, she observed,

"I wonder how many private couriers Lady Borrowdale keeps in pay, to
bring over the newest fashions from Paris. Have you seen her to-night?
did you ever behold any thing like the magnificence of her gown?"--"I
think," replied Lord Arlingford, "that she is a very fine-looking
person, and in her youth must have been perfectly beautiful; but I did
not observe her gown." The subject seemed to inspire Lord Arlingford,
who broke through the usual briefness of his sentences as he continued,
"And her manner, I think, is excellent; there is so much dignity in it,
united with so much courtesy; and she is never, I am told, capricious,
or forgetful of good-breeding."

"Why, my dear Lord Arlingford, this is an oration--you are quite
eloquent! But you cannot really like that old-fashioned _manière_ of
curtseying."

"Indeed I am serious; I like it very much: and if I were to point
out the person whose manners I should like to see any one I loved
adopt, in public at least--for I have not the honour of her intimate
acquaintance--it would be Lady Borrowdale's."

"How singular you are! Really, if you entertain such opinions as these,
we must expel you from our circle. But if you are determined to be
extraordinary, I suppose you will tell me that you cannot bear any
thing that is younger or more modern."

"Pardon me; there is Lady Georgina Melcombe, and the Ladies
Fitzmaurice, and their cousins, the Ladies Partington, and many others,
who look as if they were every thing which the young and lovely ought
to be,--unaffected, cheerful, and courteous."

"Oh, this is worse and worse; you are becoming quite insufferable. But
do tell me who is that person there, whose appearance is so particular,
and who has so extraordinary an air--is he a foreigner?"

"No--that is Lord Albert D'Esterre. Are you not acquainted with him? He
is a very charming person,--full of talent, and very handsome, as you
see. But I forget--you cannot well recollect him, for he went to the
Continent as a boy, and is only lately returned."

"True; I remember--I hear he is likely to distinguish himself--pray
present him to me."

The presentation took place; and, after a few words, including an
invitation to Lord Albert to her _soirées_, Lady Tilney passed on with
Lord Arlingford to where the Duchess of Hermanton was standing.

To have taken pains thus to seek one whom she affected to despise,
whose manners and right to fashion she was perpetually calling in
question, might argue great inconsistency; but in this instance Lady
Tilney's wishes to be well with the Duchess of Hermanton, far from
being the result of any thing like the contradiction of a settled
principle, were the absolute fruits of it, and were influenced by a
feeling of fear--if she would have confessed it--by an apprehension
that that really amiable person, possessing the envied superiority of
united rank and birth and talent, should assume her proper place in
society, and overthrow the false rule to which Lady Tilney herself laid
claim. It was therefore conciliation rather; and, as she addressed
the Duchess, she put on her sweetest smiles, and laid aside those
indescribable airs which were displayed when she intended to scorn
or crush; and, while uttering those nothings which form the sum and
substance of what is said on such occasions, her manners were almost
servile. The simplicity of unquestioned superiority is one of its
most sure characteristics; and the Duchess of Hermanton's mode of
receiving this homage was unaffected and courteous. But as the two
persons had little similarity in their natures, the conference lasted
only sufficiently long for Lady Tilney to preserve that degree of
familiarity in acquaintance, which she determined should prevent
her being a stranger to one too independent and distinguished to be
altogether passed over.

Meanwhile, Lord Arlingford having profited by the opportunity to quit
Lady Tilney, now joined Lady Georgina Melcombe and some of the persons
standing together in another part of the room; and Lady Tilney, thus
left alone, had, for a few moments, leisure to behold the splendour of
the apartments and of the persons met in them. In her heart she could
not but acknowledge that whatever London could boast as being most
distinguished was present, and that the good and great predominated;
but it was _not exclusive_--that is, it was an assembly constituted of
almost all those whose rank entitled them to be on the list of Lady
Feuillemerte's visitors.

It was numerous, therefore, which is the very essence of an assembly;
for what is so insipid as public receptions where the members are few,
the rooms half filled, and the scene unenlivened by those circumstances
which a diversity of ages, characters, and dresses cast around?

Here all met the society which best accorded with their tastes.
The politician, the courtier, the man of fashion, found here their
associates and their amusement, each in their different sphere, as they
retired from the rest to discuss some present topic of public interest,
or glided through the throng with that easy politeness which breathed
of the atmosphere they inhaled in the presence of their Sovereign,
paying the well-timed compliment as they passed, or displaying
the refinement of wit and repartee in their short and animated
conversations.

Here, too, amidst the younger and fresher forms, beauties of former
days still shone in the dignity of their manners, and of that air and
carriage which the fashion of their time had rendered a portion of
themselves; which lent a grace to their every movement, and might well
have afforded a school of manners and propriety of outward bearing
for the young who mingled with them--in counteraction of the oblivion
and extermination of all manners, which the prevailing system of the
_soi-disant_ members of _ton_ would have enforced.

Such, at least, were the external features of an old-fashioned
assembly--in its moral character the advantages were no less. Its
honest and avowed purpose was the interchange of those courtesies
which render life agreeable, and the preservation of those general
guards in society which, as checks to profligacy, are more useful than
abstract theories of ethics, or codes of moral laws. People, unless
lost, sin not so blindly in mixed communities--one individual forms a
restraint on the others--children stand in awe of parents, and these,
in their turn, acknowledge a wholesome control in the presence of
their offspring--the good are a terror to the evil (for an alloy will
ever exist); while the one and the other mutually afford examples of
imitation, or beacons of danger to be avoided, which every individual
may, if there be the will, turn to profit, in the correction of some
temper, the curbing of some excess, the chastening of some wish, or the
abandonment of some folly.

The more intimate associations in life are not here spoken of; but
these in characters of the same description as Lady Feuillemerte's,
would doubtless be founded on the same basis, and have the same
objects in view; for whether in the cherishing of natural affections,
the formation of those friendships which spring up in the domestic
circle, the cultivation and exercise of talents which give a charm to
existence, or the acquirement of more important attainments, the system
which holds out examples, and affords restraint, will ever be best.

The "_société choisie_," however, which Lady Tilney desired to form,
was, in its nature, the very reverse of what has been described. Its
exclusive character was to consist, not in the selection of what was
amiable in nobility, or virtuous in talent; it was not to be the circle
drawn within a narrower circumference, for a more perfect enjoyment of
private friendship, or the cultivation of more intellectual pursuits
than the wide range of fashionable life could afford; it was not to be
retirement from the busier throng, for the purposes of a more rational
and purer existence; but it was to consist of those whose follies
in the pursuit of pleasure, and whose weakness in the indulgence of
all the empty toys of life, had given them a distinction above their
fellows; of those who judged immorality, when burnished by the tinsel
of superficial acquirements, as venial error;--of those, in short,
who were either senseless or wicked enough to consider life but a
bubble, to be blown down the current, according to the dictates of
the will, and whose daily existence testified, that they were alike
without a thought or a fear for the morrow's eternity. Such were to be
its members, and its seclusion from the general eye of the world, its
secession from all others but--; its rigid law, that unmarried women
were not eligible to its chosen meetings--for what purpose, and to what
end were these? If for vanity of distinction, merely, it was weak;
if for the purpose of indulging in pursuits and conversation, which
would receive a check in a society less selected for the object--it
was wicked. In whichever point of view, a society so constituted must
be demoralizing, for assuredly it would have the character of being,
if it even were not, really vicious--and its example would have a
contaminating effect in the corruption of morals, and the overthrow of
the barriers of domestic peace.

It cannot be said that these were the reflections of Lady Tilney,
as she stood for the few moments alone in the crowd at Lady
Feuillemerte's. It would be injustice to her to suppose that they were,
or that she contemplated in the formation of a coterie, according to
her own peculiar prejudices, any of the evils with which the system was
sure to be pregnant. It is thus, however, with all reforms, entered
upon for private ends; the individual sees but the accomplishment
of his own and his immediate associates' views, in what is to be
overturned; and the fatal result accruing to the community, even if
clearly distinguished, are at the moment but as dust in the balance of
self.

It is more probable that, as Lady Tilney gazed on the mingled group
around her, blind to the demerits of her projected revolution of
society, and proud of influence, which over a certain portion of the
London world she had succeeded in establishing, she became firmer in
her purpose; and as her eye fell on one individual after another, whose
manners, mode of life, dress, or very name were disagreeable to her,
or proved them wanting in the stamp of ideal fashion, the necessity
of the measure she contemplated she conceived became more and more
imperative. Whatever might have been Lady Tilney's reflections, she
was not long suffered to indulge them. In the tide which passed before
her appeared Lord Rainham, unattended however, as previously, by the
Comtesse Leinsengen: Lady Tilney therefore awaited his address, without
any appearance of recurrence to her professed distaste for royalty.

"A marvel, I declare!" were the opening words of a speech already
polished, _usque ad unguam_, before Lord Rainham ventured to give it
utterance.--"Behold Lady Tilney without a crowd of worshippers at her
feet!--Explain me this phenomenon, and say, have you been cruel to your
slaves, and are they gone themselves, or have they forgotten their
allegiance? Such things have been, though they ought not to be--and yet
methinks you would find it sufficiently dull, if all things were as
they ought to be, would you not? tell me the truth, and give me your
confidence; I have long wished to have the confidence of a handsome
woman, and I promise you _indulgentia plenaria_."

"No, not for the world!--I hold it to be quite a false maxim to have
any confidants: besides I have nothing to confide."

"You are too wise to be so handsome," said Lord Rainham abruptly, "and
so good night; for since you will not parley with me, 'tis in vain I
linger;" and as he turned away, words of fresh _impromptu_ on some
other subject began audibly to escape his lips.

"In your orisons be all my sins remembered," whispered Mr. Ombre as
he passed, and again found himself at Lady Tilney's side. "It is high
time such bookworms as I should retire into our cells; so, lady sweet,
good night.--You know it is not I who speak, but he, who would have
been blest, could he have poured all his sweetest lays into that gentle
ear." Lady Tilney considered the homage of talent as peculiarly her
own, and would gladly have retained the speaker; but gliding with the
gentle undulation of some shadowy form towards the door, he escaped the
infliction of a penalty, which even the syren smiles which were his
reward could hardly at times repay.

It was now growing late--the assembly was breaking up, and Lady Tilney
looked anxiously for some _cavalier_ to attend her to her carriage: but
this was not a point of easy settlement. In degree he must be either
of rank, or a dependent--one who was her equal, or one on whom she
might confer distinction by her choice of his services. Neither such
requisites, however, were to be found in the group around, and Lady
Tilney, whilst feeling yet more and more the necessity of an exclusive
circle, where such predicaments would be avoided, was doomed still
further mortification in the approach of Colonel Temple, a person whom
she hardly ever considered recognizable, and whose offer of assistance,
made evidently with sarcastic reference to her being alone, came in a
shape particularly offensive to her.

"Will you allow me to have the honour of calling your carriage," he
said, addressing her with easy familiarity; "or if you are going to
walk through the rooms, allow me to escort you?" (offering his arm).

"No," said Lady Tilney, in a manner that might have awed any one else;
"I am going away immediately."

"Well, then, let me call your carriage," he replied, with a tenacity
that nothing could evade--whilst Lady Tilney continued to move on,
terrified lest she should be seen _so_ attended.

This apparent anxiety to avoid him, was, however, with Colonel Temple,
the surest incitement to a continuance of his proffered attentions. It
might not have been exactly consistent with the general, high breeding
and politeness which distinguished Lady Feuillemerte's assemblies, for
any one to have acted under this influence perhaps; but Col. Temple was
a character known to all the world as such, and privileged to do things
which no one else did. He was a man, too, of family, and felt his
situation in society, in the midst of all his eccentricities. His want
of refinement had its compensation in an honesty of disposition quite
at variance with the measured forms of fashionable exclusiveness, but
which made him generally beloved; while his shrewd sense, mixed with a
certain vein of sarcastic humour, always penetrated the littleness of
vanity, and often inflicted on it its severest wounds.

Lady Tilney, from repeated slights, was a darling object of his
attacks, and could she without compromise have purchased immunity from
their never-failing and successful arrogance, by an honourable truce,
she would gladly have done so. But Col. Temple was _too_ arrogant,
_too_ presumptuous, to be checked by any defiance of ultra fashion--too
independent, too high-spirited, to suffer a cold and haughty
recognition, in place of the politeness and courtesy due to him as a
gentleman, and thus this warfare had become interminable.

Enjoying his triumphs in the way in question, he followed Lady Tilney
from room to room--even to the steps of her carriage, assuring her
as they proceeded, that her apprehensions of being detected in his
society were compliments to him beyond price; he was aware that, to be
of importance, the next thing to being liked, was being feared--and
bidding her be sure to send him a card for her next choice _soirée_, he
handed his victim into her carriage, under a thousand half-pronounced
inuendos upon his insufferable vulgarity, and the awful anathema of
future exclusion.




CHAPTER IV.

A MODERN COTERIE.


If any circumstance had been wanting to give strength to Lady Tilney's
resolves on the momentous question of social reform, the occurrences
at Lady Feuillemerte's were in themselves sufficient--at least, they
formed an addition to that kind of plausible excuse, sought for on all
occasions where the will is previously set on a particular line of
conduct, but which, without a pretext, it would hardly be safe for the
individual to adopt.

The motley and unkindred assemblage of the previous evening, with its
royal restraints, its want of organization in its inferior members, and
the consequent offences experienced by those of higher order--for Lady
Tilney, although she did not divulge the stain inflicted by Colonel
Temple's assiduities, yet felt it deeply,--were points she dwelt upon
to her colleagues in the following morning with that extreme pathos and
eloquence which the sufferings of self never fail to produce, and which
could not but enforce on her auditors conviction of the necessity of
the measures she proposed.

Closeted, therefore, with the leading characters in her own peculiar
circle, the final arrangements for that _société choisie_ which was
to eclipse courts and banish sovereigns, to school rank, and bring to
maturity all the yet unripened follies of a _soi-disant ton_, were at
length concluded. The lists were full--the doors were closed to all but
the secret representatives of the system, and the anathema went forth.
Strange that St. James's did not shake from its foundation, England's
sovereign resign his sceptre, and her lengthened line of nobility
crouch in the dust, under the awful denunciation of such an ascendancy.
But though this were not so--yet must the loyalty of many a high-born
subject, and the purity of many a noble and virtuous mind, have been
outraged, when the results of a system at once so contemptuous and
immoral began to be developed.

It will be remembered that Lady Tilney had already fixed on the evening
of Lady Borrowdale's assembly as a fitting occasion for the display of
her own undivided rule in the empire of fashion. Her cards had been
issued for that purpose, and these were now followed by injunctions
through various channels, requiring an early attendance--since the two
syrens of the day, Pasta and Sontag, it was whispered, were engaged
to give additional effect to the opening charms of exclusiveness,
and render the blow struck at the existing state of society at once
decisive.

Lady Borrowdale's apartments, it was decreed, should possess only
the _canaille_ of the fashionable world, and royalty be doomed to
oblivion there, in the surpassing lustre which Lady Tilney's circle
would display. To the authority that called for this ready obedience,
none of the satellites of Lady Tilney's court were ever known to offer
resistance;--and though the chiefs of her party alone knew the real
object of the summons, yet the uninitiated hastened to obey it with the
same alacrity as their superiors, satisfied that in so doing they were
best consulting their views of advancement to the distinction courted
by them, as well as securing a greater license in the indulgence of
those follies and errors which made the sum of their daily occupation.

To tell of the decoration of the apartments, of the splendour and
luxury which reigned around the mansion of Lady Tilney, to dwell on
externals, would be to repeat descriptions a thousand times given, and
tend to no developement of import. A plant, under the fairest guise of
colour or of form, sometimes contains within its fibres the deadliest
poison; and in the scorching plains of the East, the upas-tree extends
an alluring shade over the exhausted and unconscious traveller, who is
soon to sink beneath its deadly atmosphere. But what would it profit
were the naturalist to dwell only on the pencilling and texture of the
one, or the traveller describe vaguely the outspreading branches and
inviting coolness of the other, and yet neglect to record the noxious
qualities and inherent dangers of each. The plant and its virtues, not
the scene in which it is to be found, must first be recognised and
known, if escape from its contagion be intended;--and it is to the
habits and system of a people, not to the country they inhabit, that we
must look, rightly to understand the manner in which their lives are
passed.

To a casual observer, Lady Tilney's assembly presented no
distinguishing external marks at variance with received habits or
customs. The rooms were not darkened, the servants passed through the
apartments at intervals in the performance of their respective duties
without constraint: the company, however, was less numerous, and more
scattered and divided into detached parties. The conversation, with
the exception of Lady Tilney herself, was carried on in a low tone,
scarcely audible but to the individual addressed; the different members
of the coterie, when they moved about, seemed to do so under certain
measured and stated paces.

It was not, however, the step and air of real dignity of fashion, but
rather the mincing _minauderie_ of _des petites maîtresses_. Whatever
was done or spoken (when for a moment some general observation was
hazarded), appeared as if performed by rule, and under apprehension
of drawing down ridicule, which at once went to destroy all natural
grace of speech or demeanour. This sentiment attached more particularly
to the younger and newer noviciates, who felt that an unguarded
expression, or a movement at variance with the prescribed forms of
the circle, would render them the objects of the malicious remarks
and sneers of the more experienced--an uneasy restraint, therefore,
was often the consequence; and had it not been, that to form part
of so chosen a society, and under Lady Tilney's roof, was in itself
an indescribable satisfaction--some who were there might have been
suspected of suffering considerable _ennui_, and of being ready to
admit, by the suppressed and ill-concealed yawn, that although the
honour of exclusiveness was great, the pleasure was certainly small.

Not so, however, with the more initiated--these appeared by habit to
take the part at once most to their tastes; to select the companion
most agreeable to them; to remain under the eye of observation, or
retire from it, as they chose, with indifference;--for it was not
only in _what_ was done or said, but in the _manner_, also, that the
distinguishing characteristics of this coterie were to be detected.
All things were lawful--but then under outward forms (not however of
propriety always, or of morality), but of convention; and whoever
attained fulfilment of these, had the privilege, the _indulgentia
plenaria_, as proposed by Lord Rainham, to sin with impunity.

When it was said, therefore, that an assembly composed as the present
differed not in its appearance from others passing under the same
generic name, it was premised to be only under the impression of a
first view;--a more intimate acquaintance with many of its laws and
practices, so opposed to received customs in the world, could not in
the end fail to astonish! And first the observer (the moral observer
is meant) would have been struck by the discovery, that the young and
beautiful in this magic circle were all married women, and that the
person who individually (for the number was rarely more than singular)
paid his assiduous court, leant over the chair, and whispered into the
ear of the fair whom he selected or was selected by, was no aspirant to
her hand in marriage, no relative--neither was he her husband--but a
member of the privileged society, which was alone sufficient.

His astonishment would have been yet stronger on discovering that for
a season, till mutual convenience, or disagreement dissolved their
familiar acquaintance, each party, similarly paired, invariably met,
conversed, and retired at the same time, when the circle broke up, or
when they quitted it, apparently on the same footing of intimacy which
the most holy ties could have sanctioned; while those whom such a tie
actually bound to them were themselves pursuing a similar career.

Had the conversation which for the most part occupied this portion of
the _société choisie_ been reported, or reached the ear, it is possible
a considerate mind might have thought, notwithstanding the singularity
of a system which excluded the unmarried from scenes of amusement, that
it was well they formed no portion of it; but still, in an escape from
its early influence, enjoyed the opportunity of attaining to a degree
of moral principle, and feminine decorum, which must otherwise have
been swept away in the general license.

This, however, can unfortunately be said only of the one sex--the
unmarried in the other, provided their attainments were of the kind
to authorize admission, were not on the excluded list; and the young,
well-principled, and ingenuous perhaps at their outset, might, in the
examples constantly before them, have found incentive to conduct,
which at a future day they would discover to have been the great bane
and poison of their existence.--Of these the person who entered Lady
Tilney's apartments when the coterie had nearly assembled, and who was
new to most of them, offered an instance, for whom the liveliest fears
with justice might have been entertained.

Young, strikingly handsome, talented, of high rank, of widely extended
interest, and possessing all the means of gratifying every wish, to
what dangers was not Lord Albert D'Esterre exposed, in such a scene as
has been described, and on which he was from that evening to play a
part! He seemed, with the impulse of natural politeness, to look around
for Lady Tilney, as he entered, as if he would pay his first homage to
her, whose self and not her house he visited; in a manner directly the
reverse of that false refinement of modern _ton_, which seeks a display
of its _savoir vivre_, in a pointed indifference to all the received
forms of society.

Before he had reached the second room he was met by Lady Tilney, with
a greater degree of courtesy and _empressement_ than was usual in her
receptions; and his address was listened to with more complacency and
patience than generally marked her manner towards any one.--"Who is
he?" passed in whispers round the circle amongst those to whom he was
unknown.--"Did you hear his name announced?"--"No! I have seen him
somewhere before, I think--is it not Lord Albert D'Esterre, Lord ----'s
son?"

"Ah true, it is! but what an extraordinary lengthy speech he is
making--surely Lady Tilney must be ready to expire under its
duration."--"Not under its dulness, I am certain," said Lord Glenmore,
as he caught Lady Baskerville's remark to Lord Rainham, "for, D'Esterre
is too clever ever to say a dull thing." "Or ever do a wise one,
perhaps," added Lord Rainham in his most caustic manner.

"Did you hear Rainham?" whispered Spencer Newcombe to Ombre; "there was
no time for gestation there--it was really well said."--"Then, if so,"
replied his neighbour, "we may 'for once a miracle accept instead of
wit.'"

"No; I do not allow of miracles now a days," said Lord Rainham,
turning sharply round, having overheard the remark applied to him: "I
do not believe in miracles--not even in the resurrection of the Glacier
man--do you, Ombre?" The laugh was with the latter speaker; but Mr.
Ombre thought that, in fact, miracles had not ceased when Lord Rainham
could thus improvise two good things without incubation; and so he
whispered into the ear of his friend Spencer Newcombe, as Lord Rainham
moved away.

While Lord Albert D'Esterre was thus affording subject of remark to
the coterie, and their observations in turn made matter of ill-natured
review among themselves, he was addressing his courteous excuse to Lady
Tilney for having disobeyed her commands, in arriving so late. Lady
Baskerville was probably right in her conjecture, that Lady Tilney felt
considerably bored by his doing so, and making reference to injunctions
which she had forgotten the moment they were given, because certain
they would be generally obeyed, and Lady Borrowdale's assembly be left
untenanted by all her early visitors.

She heard him, however, with smiles and outward complaisance; for Lord
Albert was of consequence enough in a political way, at least, for Lady
Tilney to court; and as she assured him that he was still in good time,
and that the Sontag had not yet sung, presented him to several persons,
whom, she remarked, would be almost strangers to him after so long an
absence from England.

In all, however, that Lord Albert had said, he had been sincere; and in
his manner towards the different persons he was made known to, there
was a genuine distinguished air of high breeding and politeness, as
much at variance with the manners, as his ingenuousness was with the
minds and dispositions of those who figured in the moral masquerade
before him. Although fresh in this scene, and therefore without
contamination, he was powerful, and, therefore, worth appropriation;
and what was considered _outré_ and too _manière_ in his address, was
partially overlooked at the moment, as certain to give way under the
powerful influence of better examples.

The Sontag now came forward and poured her liquid notes mellifluous
through the assembly. Every body was in raptures--indiscriminate
raptures;--for though raptures were generally obsolete, there were a
few short seasons for a few new things in which it was permitted to
be rapturous; but woe to the unhappy individual who, ignorant of the
mark, gave way to these ebullitions at unallowed times, or beyond the
peculiar limits prescribed by _ton_.

When the _aria_ was concluded, however, the remarks among the
younger votaries of fashion were principally directed to the figure
and appearance of the singer, rather than to her performance. Leslie
Winyard admired her foot; Lady Boileau her eyes; Lord Gascoyne saw
indescribable beauty in the delicacy of her waist; and Lord Tonnerre
declared her neck to be as fine drawn and as perfect as that of a
race-horse--a simile which was perhaps the only figure of speech the
latter lord could have hazarded, consistently with his knowledge of any
subject. These by turns approached the singer, and as they addressed
her with an air of familiar condescension, seemed in their ungentle
gaze to seek an opportunity of confirming their previous judgments;
which, according to the result, were signified in the presence of the
persons by a look, or a whisper, to one another.

If a few ventured an observation on what they had been listening to, it
was in a tone either of indiscriminate praise, founded on some one's
opinion in their own circle from whose decree there was no appeal;
or else, measuring things in themselves admitting not of parallel,
by one another, they drew an unfair comparison between the powers of
Sontag and of Pasta; just in the same way as a pseudo connoisseur would
measure the merits of Paul Veronese or Tintoretto by those of Raphael.

"I am surprised you waste so much time in this discussion," said Mr.
Ombre, who was standing near the parties debating on the latter point;
"there can be no question as to the merits of the case--Sontag is new."

"Is she not enchanting?" asked Lady Tilney, addressing Lord Albert
D'Esterre, who had been listening with the utmost attention--"quite
perfection!" He smiled; "I do not know that I ever heard or saw any
thing _quite perfect_; at all events, I prefer Pasta."

"Well, you surprise me!" replied Lady Baskerville; "there is such
brilliancy--such lightness, such fluency in the Sontag."

"But there is more depth, more pathos, more poetry in Pasta.
Nevertheless I admire Mademoiselle Sontag; and because I prefer one, I
am not deaf to the powers of another singer--a feeling of the sublime
does not exclude the lesser sense of the beautiful."--"What a prosing,
sententious popinjay; ay!" whispered Lord Baskerville to Lady Ellersby.

"But he is very handsome," she answered.

"I know not what you ladies may esteem handsome" (and here Lord
Baskerville put himself in his best possible form, and bent his cane
against the ground); "but I can see nothing in that stiff conceited
face and figure to call handsome; and I would not be doomed to
listen to his affected pretensions for half an hour together on
any condition whatever--no, not to hear Sontag sing three songs
consecutively--beautiful, charming, dear as she is!"

"Does beauty enter in at the ears?" asked Spencer Newcombe.

"Not exactly; but it goes a great way towards making what does enter
there agreeable," replied Lord Baskerville.

"What do you say, Sir Henry D'Aubigne," addressing that celebrated
artist: "is not the Sontag exceedingly lovely?"

"Indeed I have not yet had an opportunity of judging," was Sir Henry's
discreet reply; for he gave offence to none. "There is considerable
grace and play of countenance certainly; a fine-cut eye; and on the
whole I should say she was a very pretty creature. But really, in this
land of beauty, (looking round him as he spoke), one may be allowed to
be difficult, and where there is so much to dazzle, confess oneself
unable to decide."

"Sir Henry is almost as graceful in his speech as in his portraits; I
wish I were such a poet!" sighed Mr. Ombre, "and then I might hope to
turn all the ladies' hearts, for they accept your homage, but will not
mine, although I never flatter."

Thus did the poet and the painter mutually pay their allotted fealties
to the sovereigns of _ton_, when the whisper ran round the room that
the Sontag was again about to sing.

During the performance, Lord Albert D'Esterre was standing at the back
of Lady Hamlet Vernon's chair, addressing to her, at intervals, his
conversation on the merits of the singer.

"I am told," said Lady Hamlet Vernon, when the music ceased, "that the
Sontag is very like Lady Adeline Seymour. You will know, Lord Albert
D'Esterre?" Lord Albert coloured.

"I do not see the least resemblance to my cousin;" and then he
added: "I was not aware that Lady Adeline had the advantage of your
acquaintance."

"I have not the pleasure of her's neither--I hear she is a most
delightful person!" Lord Albert again coloured, and felt his heart beat
quicker at the mention of a name so dear to him.

"Is Lady Dunmelraise expected in town this year?" continued Lady Hamlet
Vernon; "I understand she has very bad health. A very intimate friend
of mine, from whom I sometimes receive a letter, Mr. George Foley--you
may perhaps know him--and who is at present staying at Dunmelraise,
informs me that she is far from well."

Lord Albert D'Esterre found himself irresistibly drawn towards Lady
Hamlet Vernon, by the circumstance of her knowledge of Lady Adeline
Seymour, and they continued for a long while in conversation--till
interrupted by Lord Rainham, who, quitting the circle of the political
characters of the day, with whom he had been in apparently close
discussion, addressed Lady Hamlet Vernon on some other topic, and Lord
Albert turned aside.

"Tell me what is your real opinion of the person you have been
conversing with?" said Lord Rainham, in a low voice, while his small
quick eye followed Lord Albert; "is he clever? has he talent--tact, or
any other serviceable quality?"--"I hardly know how to answer inquiries
of such depth," answered Lady Hamlet Vernon, smiling; "had you asked me
if he were agreeable, I could have answered yes. But to what do your
questions tend--are they general or particular; or are they political,
or what?"

"Oh, I mean, is he like other people, like other young men--empty--and
conceited?--or has he wherewithal to make his conversation
endurable--worth listening to--point--repartee--subject--does he talk
of people or of things?"

"Of both. But shall I add another to your list of inquiries--To what
side of the question does he lean? Does not this sum up all you would
know from me? And what if I should tell you--I know nothing about the
matter?"

"Psha! well: that may be too--what _do_ you think--?"

"Why I think him very handsome."

"Aye, may be so; I dare say he is--but--"

"But has he avowed his political creed? will he support your favourite
measures, or oppose them? I know that is all you wish me to say,"
replied Lady Hamlet Vernon.

"Why, to be sure, one judges in these days of a man's sense a little
by his politics--one learns whether he thinks at all, or follows his
interests."

"Oh, you all do that, my dear lord. But come; I will tell you what I
think of Lord Albert D'Esterre: I think he is worth winning--and--"

"You will try," said Lord Rainham.

"Fi donc!--now I will tell you no more." And Lady Hamlet Vernon left
the foiled diplomatist to lament the failure of his mission, and learn
to play his part better for the future.

The evening, or rather the night, was wearing fast away; the Sontag
had sung three times, and those who had formed part of Lady Tilney's
first _soirée choisie_ were soon to be left in possession only of the
recollections--no--not the recollections--the life of the aggregate
assembled there would banish such an exercise of mental powers--but in
possession of the fact, that they had been of the chosen number; that
they _had_ heard the favourite of the hour, _not_ in the too-frequented
Opera, but in the privacy of the drawing-room; and that they alone
could justly, therefore, weigh her merits, and determine her defects.

In follies such as these a large portion of Lady Tilney's associates
were sure to find gratification on the morrow. And it might have
been well had all contented themselves with these, so comparatively
harmless, although such worthless, fruits of _exclusive ton_; but it
may be feared that, with some, the result of that evening, and the
prospect of others to succeed it of the same kind, held out objects of
a far different complexion, which a sure immunity from censure, and a
complete freedom from obnoxious comparisons, successfully tended to
promote.

Lord Albert D'Esterre had turned away from a group of young men with
whom he had been conversing, and whose discourse, assuming a tone and
character equally indelicate and revolting to his feelings, he thus
endeavoured to avoid, when he found himself near Lady Boileau.

"Lord Albert D'Esterre," she said, addressing him, "if you will excuse
an invitation so destitute of form, will you do Lord Boileau and myself
the pleasure of dining with us on Saturday--I will send you a card."
Lord Albert bowed with courtesy, and expressed himself sorry that he
was already engaged, and, after some conversation of little interest,
as Lady Boileau's carriage was announced, she left the room. Leslie
Winyard, with the familiarity of one well acquainted, whispered in Lord
Albert's ear--

"You have _échappéd belle_ from that."

"What do you mean?" asked the latter.

"Why, I mean that you have escaped a most uncomfortable concern by just
refusing the invitation to the Boileaus."

"I thought I heard you say to Lady Boileau but now that you would be
delighted to wait upon her."

"Oh yes, certainly, one _says_ those sort of things; and if nothing
better occurs, one _does_ them;--but it does not always follow: for
instance, if any one were to ask me whom I liked better, or if you, or
some equally pleasant person, were to propose our dining together at
Crockford's--"

"I am not a member of Crockford's," said Lord Albert D'Esterre, gravely.

"Oh! but your name is down, and _you_ are certain of being admitted
on the next ballot, and--" Lord Albert attempted to reply, but Leslie
Winyard continued, "and, as I was telling you, if a pleasant dinner was
prepared at Crockey's, I should, of course, not starve myself at the
Boileaus."

"I confess myself at a loss to comprehend what you mean."

"Well then, some day go and try; find yourself frozen in rooms where
the fire is lit only five minutes before the hour of your expected
arrival--starve at the hands of the very worst cook in England,--and
then, when you hear that my Lady spends twelve guineas on a new bonnet,
squanders thousands on her journies to Paris, and ruins Boileau in
articles for her toilette, _marvel_--but the thing is so."

"Is it possible?" Lord Albert continued saying to himself; as the
person who had been talking to him turned away, half in derision of his
unsophisticated expressions and manner of receiving what he said,--"is
it possible that so much refinement of duplicity can exist, for an end
so trivial--where the gratification of the spirit of falsehood, or the
indulgence of an ill-bred impertinence, is the only object?"

Whilst thus musing, and preparing to leave a scene which, as he became
more acquainted with the actors, appeared little suited to his tastes
or modes of thinking, he saw Lady Hamlet Vernon approach the door
unattended. A recollection that she alone, in the manner she spoke of
Lady Adeline Seymour, had seemed to have any sentiment in common with
himself, made him move towards her, and inquire if he could be of any
service in seeing her to her carriage.

"I do not know if it is up," was her reply, "but perhaps you will have
the goodness to ask." He did so, and in the interval, before it was
announced, they continued conversing. "_Je vous félicite_," said Lord
Rainham, addressing Lady Hamlet Vernon in a low tone as he passed, and
looking significantly at the same time at Lord Albert D'Esterre.

"There is no cause," she replied, "I am waiting for my carriage, and I
think it will never come."

"_Discrète_," answered Lord Rainham, as he moved towards the door, and
signalled what he had observed to Leslie Winyard, whose answering nod
expressed concurrence in his suspicions.

It was long before Lady Hamlet Vernon's carriage arrived, and she
continued talking with Lord Albert on various topics; the societies of
Paris and Vienna, compared with that of London; the state of the Opera,
and the prevalent bad taste of music on the Continent. She inquired
for many who in their exile in this country had been known to her, and
with whom, in the splendour of restored rank and fortunes, she found
Lord Albert had lived on terms of close intimacy. In speaking of them
he seemed to dwell with pleasure on their recollection of the services
rendered them in England, as a bright trait in the human character,
which betokened feelings that it was plain to see were in accordance
with his own generous and noble nature--and which had formed the basis
of that familiar intercourse in which he had lived with them. Although
the reverse of this picture has been ascribed to too many foreigners,
who have with justice been accused of ingratitude, it ought not
therefore to be recorded that all were subject to such condemnation.
Lord Albert knew otherwise.

As he extolled their characters and perfections, and spoke of the
charms which their society had always possessed for him, Lady Hamlet
Vernon listened with increased attention, as if she would have gathered
from his discourse the individual sources of that satisfaction, which
he professed in so lively a manner to have found. "You are warm and
enthusiastic in your eulogiums," she said: "I hope that in England,
also, you may find those whom, with the same reasons, and an equal
ardour of attachment, you will be disposed to admit to your friendship."

There was something in the tone in which these words were addressed
to him, that made Lord Albert D'Esterre for a moment fix his eyes on
the speaker; but they were as quickly withdrawn, when he saw Lady
Hamlet Vernon blush, apparently confused, and then pluck a flower from
a vase near her, while she endeavoured to hide her face by inhaling
the perfume. There was an awkwardness in the pause which ensued, which
neither seemed at the moment able to surmount; when fortunately Lady
Hamlet Vernon's carriage was called, and as Lord Albert handed her to
it, he received an invitation to her house in the evening, when Lady
Tilney's _coterie_ were to assemble there.




CHAPTER V.

"NEWSPAPERS"--"THE PARK."


The newspapers of the following morning had devoted columns to the
description of Lady Borrowdale's entertainment, and the numbering of
the distinguished persons assembled there; the dresses, the apartments,
the decorations, the viands, and every minute arrangement, were all
detailed with an accuracy which an eye-witness of the scene would
readily have acknowledged, and which none but an eye-witness could
possibly have succeeded in giving.

In a far less conspicuous and pretending manner, did the announcement
figure in the same paper, that "Lady Tilney yesterday evening received
a select circle of her friends at her house in ---- Street, where
the Sontag gave several specimens of her unrivalled talents." An
uninstructed reader would have been misled by these harbingers of
public events; and from the tone of the respective _affichés_ feel
justified in the conclusion, that the one must have been the production
of Lady Borrowdale's own pen, or at least from her dictation, while the
other appeared naturally as the result of that publicity, to which the
actions of the great are always subjected. But this would have been
far from the fact, or rather the very opposite to it; it was to the
milliners, the confectioners, the musicians, the _maître d'hotel_, and
the other individuals interested in affording publicity to the dresses
and entertainments of their employers, that the long and circumstantial
details of Lady Borrowdale's, or any other great assembly, are to be
attributed; free from any petty interference, or the gratification of a
silly vanity on the part of the principals themselves.

That this was the fact, was a circumstance which could not escape Lady
Tilney; and aware that such evidence, if it reached the public eye,
would destroy at once all the sacredness of her select _coteries_,
and the charms of the _société choisie_ which she was labouring to
form, she determined on suppressing it, and issued orders, not to
be disobeyed with impunity, for the effectual prevention of any
announcement of whom the circle consisted of on the evening in
question, and of its proceedings, with the exception that it excelled
all other of the same date, by the possession of Sontag's inimitable
powers. A mystery, which suited well with the ideas of Lady Tilney
and of her friends on the subject of exclusive _ton_, would thus, she
conceived, be thrown over their actions, and the rites of the supreme
deity of fashion impenetrably veiled from the prying, inquisitive eye,
and vulgar imitation of its pretending votaries.

Humility is a duty of as especial injunction in the sacred volume,
as its opposite is of strict prohibition; and let it not surprise,
therefore, that Lord Albert D'Esterre, young in the world's masquerade,
and imbued with feelings, which if not religiously grounded, were
at least, from their purity, analogous to the moral doctrine which
religion teaches, should be struck, as he perused the two paragraphs,
by the apparent vanity of the one compared with the unostentatious
wording of the other, and drew his inferences accordingly.

"What silly pomp in Lady Borrowdale; how unworthy her rank--how
positively little, thus to set forth the splendour of her
entertainment, which is worth nothing when it loses the character of
being a natural consequence of her station in society. What could
be more brilliant than Lady Tilney's assembly; and yet there is no
parade--no _catalogue raisonnée_ of all that was seen, done, or said in
her drawing-rooms--how much more like a woman of real fashion."

Had Lord Albert D'Esterre been acquainted with the actual truth,
in all probability the opinion which he passed on this trivial
circumstance, as he took his breakfast, would have been the very
reverse of what it was; and, however he might hold cheap any silly
ostentatious display of wealth or rank, he would certainly have been
more ready to overlook Lady Borrowdale's carelessness whether her
assembly was reported accurately, or not at all, than he would have
been to forgive Lady Tilney's over-anxiety and ultra, _ton_ism (if such
a word may be coined), to screen the names and numbers of her guests,
and give celebrity to the coterie by making it a matter of secrecy and
of injunction to her domestics.

The mornings of Lord Albert, however, were generally passed in
reflections of much more use and importance than such as newspaper
subjects could furnish. During the whole of his residence abroad, his
time had been employed in acquirements of a solid kind. He had studied
men and things--had made himself acquainted with the constitutions,
governments, resources, and political importance of all the great
European states; had lived amongst their inhabitants for the purpose
of acquiring that accurate knowledge of their habits and dispositions,
which tends so much to a just appreciation of the line of policy to
be observed towards them, and which must ever be influenced by an
acquaintance with national character.

While receiving their instructions he had formed friendships with
some of their most distinguished literati in all the different
branches of knowledge, and had returned to England fully prepared for
the commencement of that public career to which his inclination led
him; and in which, amongst those who knew him intimately, and could
appreciate his abilities, he was justly expected to shine.

The habit of occupation which he had formed whilst thus pursuing his
studies on the Continent, did not desert Lord Albert D'Esterre, even
in the noise and bustle of London society, in the midst of which he
now found himself; but in the mass of business which now fell upon
him in consequence of his taking possession of his large estates, in
the conferences of lawyers and agents, in the answering of letters on
these matters of varied interest which now occupied him, and in the
attentions to those minor cases of life, the etiquettes and forms of
the world, he still found leisure for serious and studious application;
nor indulged in the idleness of fashion till the duties of the morning
had been performed, when alone he availed himself of them, for the
purpose of relaxation and the unbending of his mind.

It was the morning after Lady Tilney's soirée, and when he had gone
through his usual course of occupations, that Lord Albert recollected,
with what would be called old-fashioned politeness, "the propriety of
leaving his cards with the persons to whom he had been presented the
preceding evening, and more particularly with Lady Tilney herself; and
he determined to do so on his way to the Park. On arriving at Lady
Tilney's door he was informed that she was at home (for his name was
already on the list of those who had the entrée), and he was preparing
to dismount when he saw the carriage of the Countess Leinsengen
drive up. She bowed to him, and he was presently at the _portière_
to hand her out; and offering her his arm, conducted her to Lady
Tilney's boudoir. "Comment ça va-t-il chère Comtesse," said the former
addressing her; "I congratulate you on possessing de acquaintance of
de only polite Englishman I have ever known--Dare is milor Albert
D'Esterre had vraiement de galanterie to get off his horse and conduct
me from my carriage. N'est-ce pas merveilleux in dis country!"

Lord Albert bowed to the compliment; but added: "I am sure Lady
Tilney will not allow such a cruel sentence on our nation to pass even
your lips, Comtesse; and will agree with me, that though a few may
have taken up a false system, and assumed an air of disregard to the
courtesies of life, yet it is only such as seek for distinction by
false means, and by doing the reverse of what others do: we cannot,
therefore, allow the censure to be general on us all; indeed, I do
my sex but justice I hope, when I say, that they are in this country
invariably the friends and supporters of women, and--" "Oh yes; perhaps
if one tumble down, or break one's leg, or meet vid any personal danger
or affront, dis may be so; but dese affairs do not arise every day: and
for de little cares of de men, _les petits soins_, I never knew one of
your country men who knew vat dey meant."

Lord Albert smiled at the manner in which the argument in favour of
his politeness was maintained; but perceiving Lady Tilney little
inclined to keep up a conversation on the subject of national manners,
he refrained from drawing the comparison, which would have been just,
between a natural politeness, arising as much from feeling and imbued
delicacy of sentiment, as from habit, and the mere outward forms of
courtesy and etiquette, which in those most profuse of them have seldom
any thing of sincerity.

"Well, I suppose ve must go to dat tiresome Almack dis evening. You
go?" said the Comtesse Leinsengen, addressing Lady Tilney; "for my part
I tink I shall viddraw my name."

"Oh, certainly I shall go," replied the latter, "for it is absolutely
necessary you know, my dear Comtesse, that some of us should be there;
and besides I am of opinion that as people must have something to keep
them quiet, and which _they think recherché_, Almack's is as good
as any thing else, and therefore I shall support it--In regard to
_us_, I agree perfectly with you, it is _passée_, and no longer what
was intended." The Comtesse shrugged her shoulders: "You will be at
Almack's to-night," said Lady Tilney, turning to Lord Albert D'Esterre,
"although we are giving it such a bad name, will you not?"

"Your hours of admission are limited you know, and I scarcely think I
can get away in time from ----"

"There is no debate of consequence, is there?" rejoined Lady Tilney
with earnestness--"I may forget, but should there be, of course----"

"I did not mean from the house," continued Lord Albert, "but I am
going to dine where I shall meet Baron H.; I have known him on the
continent, and his conversation is so very interesting."--"And so very
long," added the Comtesse Leinsengen, interrupting him, and with a look
which was intended to repay many discussions she had been constrained
to endure at Lady Tilney's hands; "I wonder he ever finds people to
listen to him."--"But where do you dine," said Lady Tilney, seeming to
disregard the opinion just uttered. "I know Barnette, and he is very
agreeable, very clever, but I wonder he allows himself to be so _fétéd_
by people so little known in the world. I shall be happy, I am sure--"

"I am to meet him at the Miss D.'s," replied Lord Albert, interrupting
her, and who felt that _this_ was the point he was called upon to
answer, and not that of who were or who were not known in Lady Tilney's
estimation.

"And do you really visit them?" said the latter with great surprise,
"are you not _ennuyé_ to death at their parties?"

"_Ennuyé!_ no--but then I must premise that I never am so under any
circumstances."

"Ah, _bon!_ do tell me how that is, Milor," said the Comtesse
Leinsengen, "precisely, do tell me how you avoid infection from dat
prevalent disease of your island, dat _bore_ you call it."

"Oh, I always do what I like," replied Lord Albert with a smile.

"Cela ne fait rien à l'affaire, one do not always know vat von like."

"I have nothing to reply to that; but for myself, if I do not find
exactly what I like I always endeavour to extract entertainment from
the persons or place, where, or with whom I may chance to be."

"Par exemple, at the Miss D.'s, what can you find at their horrible
conversaziones to keep you awake," asked Lady Tilney, "c'est un ennui à
périr, it makes me yawn to think of it."

"Oh, he goes to do penance for his sins, and purchase indulgence for
dose to come, n'est ce pas, Milor?"

"Neither, I assure you; I was really more entertained during a _soirée_
there last week than I have been since my return to England."

"Ah, le beau compliment! de grâce do not avow it," said the Comtesse.

Lady Tilney looked amazed at these opinions, like one in doubt if she
had not with too much precipitation admitted an enemy within the camp,
in the person of Lord Albert; and whilst canvassing the necessity of
retrieving her error, by his future exclusion, and at the same time
the policy of retaining one of his interest and promise in her circle,
with a view to his reform, she directed her enquiries to him in a tone
almost dictatorial, as to the ground of his faith in the merits of
the society he had been extolling. "Will you tell me, Lord Albert, of
whom are these parties generally composed? I have yet to learn that
there are distinguished individuals capable of creating such great
interest apart from what is generally termed the society of London;
or, I must conclude--but I will not do that hastily--that you yourself
have imbibed ideas quite foreign to propriety, and have given way to
associations quite unfitting your situation in the world."

Lord Albert in his turn seemed astonished at these categories, but
answered with perfect ease: "I have found at the Miss D.'s many whom I
meet elsewhere and, every where; but my chief attraction is the number
of talented persons who are often assembled in the circle, and whose
conversation affords me the greatest interest, and much instruction."

"One do not go into society to be instructed," said the Comtesse
Leinsengen with a sneer.

"Surely not," added Lady Tilney, "clever people are well in their
way,--I mean your really learned persons--men who have read, travelled,
written all their lives, but then it is in one's own apartment in the
morning that they are sufferable. I know but very few indeed, who are
presentable, or who have the true talent of turning their powers to
account, without torturing one to death with their learning; and then
without great circumspection they become familiar, and one is obliged
to take so much trouble, and be so much on one's guard, to keep them
in their place. Be assured, Lord Albert, you will find this to be the
case," continued Lady Tilney, "if you give unlimited encouragement to
_gens de ce grade_--There is but one subject on which you may listen
to them, I mean politics; but how few there are of the class who are
enlightened enough to speak on that subject. We have, it is true, D--
and B-- C--, and the Count K--, sometimes with us; and among our own
countrymen, we have M-- and a few others, but--"

The Countess Leinsengen's impatience was here manifested by the usual
shrug of her shoulders, and as she perceived Lady Tilney embarking on
the interminable ocean of politics, turning quickly to Lord Albert she
enquired,

"But who may be de very clever persons, Milor, who give you so much
amusement in dis very charming society?"

"Where there are so many to name, it is hard to select," replied
Lord Albert; "but there was the great traveller, who has been further
into the interior of Africa than any one has yet penetrated. His
descriptions of deserts, and skies, and camels, conveyed me beside
him in his pilgrimage; the trackless sands in which no insect can
find subsistence; the well by which the caravan halted, the only
visible friend of the traveller throughout the vast desert; the wide
canopy of starry heavens, spread out above; those heavens and those
stars, of whose clear brightness we in these cloudy regions have but a
faint idea; the varied and picturesque garb of guides and guards; the
meekness of the patient camel; the silence of the march, unless some
alarm from the fierce and wandering tribes of the country disturbed
its tranquillity; and then the noise, and gesticulation, and activity,
which accompanied the pitching of the tents for the night's or noon's
repose, were circumstances all described and dwelt upon by the
traveller, with a nervous strength and accuracy of delineation which
nothing but original description can give, and which came to me with so
much force and truth, and such beauty of imagery, that I thought, as he
spoke, travelling was the only delightful way of passing one's life."

Lady Tilney and the Comtesse Leinsengen exchanged looks, while Lord
Albert was thus giving way to the natural feelings of a mind yet
untinctured with the follies of fashion, and which saw no degradation
to his rank in seeking and finding amusement in the society of
enlightened persons.

"Tell me," at length asked Lady Tilney, with an expression something
like contempt, "had you no _changement de décoration_; was all your
talk about camels, and deserts, and wells, and stars?"--"Ah," cried the
Comtesse Leinsengen, "_avouez moi, Milor, que la nouvelle du jour vaut
been mieux_." Lord Albert smiled, and allowed that this was amusing too
in its way; but he added,

"We had a change of divertissement I assure you, after dinner; _Il
cantar che nel' anima si sente_ took the place of conversation for a
time, and Mr. M--"

"Oh he is well enough," said Lady Tilney, "in his place, and sings
charmingly;" (for the person in question was the Anacreon of her party,
and sometimes tuned his lays to subjects on which party feeling and
political animosity loved to cast derision)--"he is well enough."--"And
sings, do you not think," rejoined Lord Albert, "divinely? I have heard
others sing finely--sweetly--scientifically--even feelingly; but such
lightness, such magic bursts of imagery, such painting of sounds, I
never heard but in his song."

"And you have heard de Sontag: you heard her dis last evening?"

"Oh yes, often; I heard her at Vienna before she came to England."

"Well, and you prefer dis little gentleman--_tout les gens sont
respectables_;" and she sneered, as if in contradiction to the words.

"Perhaps the parties will not bear a comparison," added Lady Tilney,
jealous of one whom she patronized, and whose merits she had in a
measure acknowledged; and then, turning to Lord Albert, she continued--

"You must not mistake me, my dear lord; I have no objection to the
_sort of thing_ you have been describing. I honour talent, and delight
in conversation; but then it must be on a proper footing; in circles
where those persons who talk, and talk very well I dare say, should be
under restraint; where they would feel themselves debarred entirely
from _undue_ license, and a consideration that they formed part of
the society, and where they would appear in their true characters--to
direct and amuse others when called upon; just as actors and singers
come upon the stage to play their parts, and then retire. Now in the
circle you allude to all this necessary distinction is overthrown at
once--every one there, from the nature of things, considers himself
_pair et compagnon_ of the company, and behaves accordingly. In small
rooms--"

"_On meurt de chaud au de froid, par parenthèse_," interrupted the
Comtesse, who dreaded one of Lady Tilney's long discussions; "for
dere is one moment a thorough air, and de next all is shut up, and
one fries vid de fire; but dat is always de case where dere is no
_poêle_ stove--However, adieu ma belle; I must go and leave you and
Milor dere to settle all de points about dat société which he likes so
much--adieu--_au revoir, Milor, je vous salue_."

Lord Albert would have followed his natural impulse of politeness, and
handed the Comtesse Leinsengen to her carriage; disposed, perhaps, also
to escape further conversation with Lady Tilney on topics where they
seemed to hold no ideas in common. This, however, he was not permitted
to do, the Comtesse declining his offered arm, saying she should never
be forgiven if Lady Tilney were deprived of the triumph of converting
him from his errors;--and closing the door, as she insisted on his
remaining, Lord Albert was left tête-à-tête with Lady Tilney.

"Do you not think she is terribly gone off this year?" said the latter.

"I do not know if I understand you. If it be that her beauty is gone
off, I should say yes--but I never heard she _was_ handsome."

"No?" asked Lady Tilney, with an expression of satisfaction; "but she
is surely very _distingué_ looking."--"She has the advantage of that
species of polish which the world gives," was Lord Albert's reply; "but
this often covers an unpolished mind--and I am not sure it is the first
thing I should look for."

"I like nature as much as you can do, my dear lord; I ever stood up for
that liberty and freedom attendant on persons not quite _fait au feu_;
but I must confess that I like to have them a little dressed, _not
perfectly raw_."

How far Lord Albert might have found it possible to agree with Lady
Tilney in this new question, so suddenly started, it was not left him
to discover; for at that moment fresh visitors were announced--and, as
they entered, Lord Albert prepared to depart. Not, however, till Lady
Tilney--who, spite of what she called his false theories, saw he was a
person by no means to be hastily rejected--had bidden him to her box at
the Opera on Saturday evening. "I am determined to be at the rising of
the curtain," she said, "to hear the Sontag--only it is so difficult to
be in time. Were you ever in time in your life?"--

"Yes, I have," answered Lord Albert, smiling.

"Then be at the very _premier congé d'arche_ on Saturday," added Lady
Tilney, as he bowed to her and left the apartment; glad to have gotten
over a visit of ceremony, where, from the tone of conversation which
had passed, he augured that little in future would be found consonant
to his ideas or his tastes.

As he rode from the door, Lord Albert turned his horse towards the
Park. It was one of the first Spring days that had shone in the early
year, and all the gayest of London seemed hastening to enjoy its genial
influence.--Yes, even the weary and the _blazé_ in life's crooked paths
appeared for a moment to acknowledge the charm which the brilliancy of
the scene and the brightness of the atmosphere combined to form. Smiles
were in every face and cheerfulness in every movement.

Than the throng of Hyde Park there is perhaps no promenade in Europe
more dazzling; none where more magnificence of equipage, or more beauty
of human form is displayed; and it is difficult for the young, and the
handsome more particularly, not to feel intoxicated as they enter on a
stage where the whole appearance is so fair, and where a consciousness
of personal charms assures them they must themselves shine.--It is
not probable that Lord Albert D'Esterre, philosophical as he has just
appeared while discoursing with Lady Tilney, was altogether free from
feelings so natural to his years, or from that species of vanity which
seeks a display of personal beauty, or whatever other quality may best
glitter in such a scene.

He was young, strikingly handsome, possessing a form of perfect
symmetry, and moreover one of the finest horsemen of his time. What
wonder then if, as he sought the crowded road of the Park, something
like self-love had a share in the direction which he took, and the
choice made of the spot where he might breathe the balmy air of such a
day. As he joined some of his acquaintances in the Ride, and stopped to
speak to others, passing from right to left and from north to south in
the gay and splendid crowd, his recollections were naturally turned to
similar parades in other countries, and he felt pride as an Englishman
in considering how far our national display of beauty and of wealth
outshone that of other capitals.

"Neither Vienna, nor Paris, nor St. Petersburgh, can rival this,
Glenmore," he said, in the buoyancy of his gratification at the
scene--"nothing that we ever beheld there is comparable with this--now
is it?"

"You have chosen your day well," replied the latter, "because, if it
had been one of those three hundred and sixty-five days of mist which
we generally enjoy in this metropolis, I should be disposed to dispute
the point with you, and set the sunshine of a Parisian Spring against
the brilliancy of our ladies' eyes and the splendour of their retinues.
And would you not agree with me?"

"Why, as a mere animal, I might, perhaps--climate does affect our
_physique_, I will allow; but the national pride--"

"Oh, bah! my dear D'Esterre your national pride in this instance has
nothing to do with the matter;--and if the belles of Paris, or Vienna,
or the Calmuck beauties of St. Petersburgh, could rival ours, their
horses and coach-makers surpass what you see before you, and their
summers be eternal, your _amour de la patrie_, I fear, would not long
continue _to bias_ your judgment. No, no, D'Esterre, that feeling does
not live on food like this; but we have other and better sources for
it, as you well know and feel."

Lord Albert's face shewed, in the generous glow which suffused it,
a sense of his friend's appreciation of his sounder judgment; but he
added, with a smile, "if you will not allow my present admiration
to proceed from such a noble spring, at least do not accuse me of a
reverse of sentiment, if I draw a comparison, in another respect, not
at all favourable to my countrymen. Do you observe that line of men
drawn up in battle array, and with impertinent nonchalance passing
judgment on the women who drive before them? It must, or ought to be,
at least, offensive to the pride and delicacy of the former; it would
shock any European, and is a custom more suited to eastern despotism,
and to the rules of an Asiatic slave mart, than to a civilized nation."

"But do you conclude, therefore, that the men are alone to blame in
this?" asked Lord Glenmore; "and is it to be presumed that they would
have forgotten the courtesies and respect due from them, if women in
general had been more true to the delicacies and decencies of their own
sex. Do justice to the men while you blame the practice of the day, and
acknowledge, that if the nod, or motion of the hand, or impertinent
glance of recognition now takes place of the bow and respectful
salutation of other times, yet that there must have been a sufferance
of the change, if not an encouragement of it, and an equal alteration
of manners on the other hand, or it would never have been."

"I dare say you are right, Glenmore; and if so the more the pity. But
although custom sanctions all change in reciprocal demeanour between
men and women, yet because the stiff and _manière_ address of the last
century was laid aside with the silk coat, and bag-wig, and sword, I do
not see why courtly manners should have been exiled at the same time.
So long as society is to exist on a proper footing, there must be an
outward shew of proper feelings; and when all deference in minor points
ceases, it is quite certain that all consideration of respect in more
serious matters will cease too."--"What is that I hear?" cried Leslie
Winyard, riding up to Lord Glenmore's side, and nodding familiarly to
his companion;--"what is that I hear about proper feelings, and all
consideration of respect? You are not moralizing in Hyde Park I hope."

"D'Esterre says that you men do very wrong to sit on your horses, rank
and file, and let the ladies parade before you; and I think what he
says is true."

"Indeed!" replied Mr. Leslie Winyard, and looking round in Lord Albert
D'Esterre's face with a sneer, "I believe if we were not to do so,
you would have very few beauties to admire in your ride,--the women
only come here to see us."--"And what do _you_ come for?" asked Lord
Glenmore smiling.--"Oh, to shew ourselves, certainly: to _be_ admired."
Before he could reply to the insufferable impertinence of this
speech--if indeed he would have deemed it worthy any reply--an equipage
caught the eye of Lord Glenmore as it entered the gate, and putting
spurs to his horse he was at its side in a moment and speaking to the
ladies in it. "Whose carriage is that?" asked Lord Albert of Leslie
Winyard, who continued to saunter his horse in company with him.

"It's the Melcombe's," he replied, after a pause, and having put the
handle of his whip, which contained a glass, to his eye--"it's the
Melcombe's: Georgina is a d--d fine girl. Don't you know Georgina? they
say Glenmore is smitten,--I'll go and see the fun;" and, with these
words, this model of the gallantry of the nineteenth century rode off.
"What can he mean," said Lord Albert to himself, "by calling any woman
familiarly by her name in that manner, unless she be his sister or near
relative; but to me, a stranger almost to himself, and to the party
utterly unknown, what abominable vulgarity, what detestable insolence!"

There is no saying how far Lord Albert might have gone on in his
animadversions on the manners of his sex, if he had been left quite
to himself, for there was enough around him, and before his eyes, to
provoke remark even in a mind less alive to the niceties and decorum
of polished life. But his attention was called another way, and he
in turn was to become a subject of flippant ridicule; to be set down
as a person _à prétension_, by the young men whose manners he had
very justly condemned, and who chose to attribute to coxcombry and to
affectation, a demeanour and a bearing which they had not the power to
imitate.

A graceful inclination of the head from some lady passing in the
throng, and whose feathers waved in unison with the movement, as she
bowed to Lord Albert, caught his eye. He gazed for a moment, not
recognizing the party, but lifted his hat courteously from his head,
and as he looked back to ascertain better who it was, perceived the
carriage had stopped near the gate. Turning his horse, therefore, he
rode in the direction, and discovered that it was Lady Hamlet Vernon
who had saluted him. He approached the carriage, with all the air and
gallantry of a really high bred person, thanked Lady Hamlet Vernon
for the honour she had done him, in recognizing him in the crowd;
apologized for his own blindness, and continued for some minutes in
conversation with her on the beauty and gaiety of the scene, and on
the current topics of the day. His back was turned at the time to the
phalanx of horsemen, whose ranks, and avowed occupation, had given
occasion to his remarks on the bad manners of the age; and who now,
assembled in closer body by the gate, were ready to give their last
glance of scrutiny or recognition to the departing carriages.

"That's a fine horse that man is upon," said Lord Tonnerre, pointing to
Lord Albert; "who the devil is he?"

"Oh! its D'Esterre," said Leslie Winyard, "do you not know him a mile
off, by all his bows and grimaces: for me, I could 'wind him i' the
lobby, any where.'"

"Damn the fellow, what business has he with such a horse--can he ride?"

"I should think not," drawled out Lord Baskerville; "he is the most
conceited animal London has boasted for some centuries. I heard him
talk last night about that dear Sontag, till I was sick."--"And, my
lords and gentlemen," said Leslie Winyard, in mock solemnity, "he
talked not only most fancifully, as my Lord Baskerville avers, last
night, but on this morning too: and upon what? Divine, O ye augurs!
declare it, ye soothsayers!--Why he discovered, in the very age and
body of the time--its forms and its complexion, and pronounced our
manners, rude; our bearing, unlike gentlemen; our noble array here,
barbaric and uncivilized;--in short, [assuming his natural tone] he
is a d--d puppy. I caught him, but now, preaching in this strain to
Glenmore, who, like a fool, said he agreed with him!"--A general
murmur burst from the circle which had listened to Leslie Winyard,
and the words coxcomb, ass, puppy, poppinjay, and jackanapes, issued
simultaneously from the lips of these polished ultras of ton.

Lord Tonnerre alone was silent, but his features shewed him to be as
little in a mood for gentleness as any of them. When having grasped
his rein, and put his horse on his haunches, he glanced a look of
intelligence to those around him, and was off at full speed towards the
spot where Lord Albert, leaning from his horse, was still conversing
with Lady Hamlet Vernon. Regardless of courtesy, or the consequences of
his impetuosity, he kept his violent course till within half a neck of
the carriage, and then suddenly endeavoured to wheel round, and pass on
the other side. Lord Albert's horse, startled at this close and sudden
approach, plunged, and alarmed at the carriages and noise, became, for
a moment, unmanageable, and broke away. His rider's admirable dexterity
and coolness, however, soon enabled him to rein in this movement,
and return towards the spot from which he had started, and where his
preoccupation had prevented his observing that a crowd of horsemen had
gathered, who partially stood round, or were dismounting, seemingly to
assist in some accident. He moved at a quicker pace, and found that
Lord Tonnerre's horse, on being so roughly checked, had reared, and
fallen back on his rider.

Lord Albert was on his feet in an instant, and making his way through
the throng was as eager in his inquiries, and prompt to render
assistance to the sufferer, as if he had been personally interested
in him. He found, however, no serious mischief had occurred. Lord
Tonnerre, with the exception of having been stunned with the fall, and
not yet able to rise, seemed perfectly himself, and careless of what
had happened.

His first inquiries were for his horse; and having been assured by
several of his friends that no injury had been sustained in that
quarter, he swore loudly against the animal for a fault which had been
entirely his own, gave way to the most violent gesticulations of angry
passion against the curiosity (as he called it) of the by-standers, and
so disgusted Lord Albert D'Esterre by his want of proper feeling under
an accident that might have ended fatally, that the latter mounted his
horse once more, rode round to the other side of Lady Hamlet Vernon's
carriage to assure her that she need be under no apprehension for
Lord Tonnerre's safety, and continuing by her side as she proceeded
out of the Park, left the actors of this paltry scene to bear their
discomfiture as they best could.




CHAPTER VI.

"THE OPERA."


It is not to be supposed that Lady Tilney should keep a determination
formed fully one hundred and forty-four hours before the season of
its fulfilment, or retain on the Saturday evening the same degree of
passionate admiration of the Sontag's powers, which she had expressed
on the previous Wednesday to Lord Albert D'Esterre, when announcing
her intention of being present at the first scene of the Opera. She
did, however, reach the house, on the evening in question, before the
conclusion of the third act, and found the Comtesse Leinsengen already
in her box.

"Eh bien, ma chere, à la fin vous voilà! have you been ever since at
dat tiresome dinner?"

"Oh no; I drove home immediately after you went away; but I had
a thousand things of consequence to do, and could not positively
arrive sooner. Amongst other things there was a great enormous card
of invitation from the D'Hermantons. It is quite out of the question
_my_ going: and I think the affair ought to be overturned as much as
possible--our cause should be established without offence directly
given, but decidedly; and if we are engaged elsewhere, you know, our
excuse of '_exceedingly sorry_' will always effect this, and save us,
in the present instance, from the extensive and moral acquaintances of
the Duchess, and from the _fadeur_ of her evenings. I would myself send
out cards did I not think it would be too marked; but some of us might
do so. There is Lady de Chére, I see, in her box; would you arrange
the business with her to-night in the room--Do you agree with me, my
dear Comtesse?" Her friend nodded assent; and in her abrupt rough voice
said, "N'ayez pas peur! I can always hold up my head and tread _down de
plebe_--we are used to dat; but for you, I fear in dis country, you do
not understand de matter."--

"You know, my dear Comtesse, I have often explained to you, that our
constitution--"

"Oh! trève de politiques I implore," said the Comtesse Leinsengen,
turning her head away, and looking towards the stage: "trève de
politiques je n'en puis plus; but fiez vous en à moi."--

"I am surely the last person you ought to suspect unequal to that task!
It is quite unjust to me, dear Comtesse! Have you forgotten the woman
whom Lady Ellersby and myself thought we could use? whom we actually
paraded for a season, maintained she was a beauty, and a person 'qui
feroit fureur;' and after all, when she failed, left her planté in the
midst of the promised honours; actually ejected her from Almack's,
and if we met, walked over her as a person whose face we had never
seen!--Was not this carried with a proper spirit?"

"Yes, under my suggestion; but I could have told you from de first
that her _grand nigaud de mari_ would be always _à ses trousses_, and
prevent her being of the least service to us. It is quite a mistake
to attempt such a measure, _ça sent le roman_, and I do hate all
romance--Dat young milor, (vat you name him?) dat was at your house
de oder morning, Lor--Lor Albert D'Esterre; I don't think, upon my
word, never I don't, dat he will do us any good, I have my doubts dat
he is only _un espion_, and--" Whilst the Comtesse was speaking, the
door of the box opened, and there entered, with an air of affected
refinement, a person whose appearance ill suited with his outward show
of courtliness--his face was red and large, with grey eyes, his hair
inclining to flaxen, and his whole figure round and ill-formed.

This physiognomy, however, if Sir William Temple would have allowed
himself to be natural, was an index to his disposition, for he was _au
fond_ good-natured; but an overweening vanity--a desire to be fine, and
be considered one of the beau-monde, had spoilt the man, and he became
insufferably pompous and conceited--in proportion as his exertions in
good dinners _in_ the season, a good country house _out_ of it, and
a vote in parliament, made him successful in obtaining the notice of
people of rank, and of the minister. The first thought his cook good,
his chateau, at an easy distance from London, convenient--and the last,
remembering the old woman's adage, considered that every little helped,
and that Sir William's vote, so long as it was on the right side, was
as good as any other. He had made his way thus far with tolerable
facility, but his ambition grew by feeding on, and was only to be
satisfied by the attainment of the highest distinction of the _ton_ of
the day; such as in his estimate was conferred by the protecting smile
of Lady Tilney, the Comtesse Leinsengen and others of that _élite_ body.

No opportunity therefore was lost, no pains omitted to arrive at this
desirable end, and to improve the recognition with which Sir William
found himself at times honoured, into what should at least _appear_ a
footing of intimacy. An opera box was an outwork more easy to be taken
by a _coup de main_, than a lodgment effected in the citadel itself;
and while unregistered on the favoured list of the _entré_ at Lady
Tilney's mansion, the access to her circle in the public theatre, which
was not denied him, appeared a license of the utmost importance, and
one which he was the last man to let grow obsolete by neglect of usage,
or forget to turn to profit.

"Has not the Sontag outdone herself to-night, Lady Tilney?" asked Sir
William as he entered the box.

"Yes, never was there such a singer--I have been listening till my very
ears ache with intense attention."

"I am so glad, Lady Tilney, to hear you say so, for I have been
disputing the point with Lord Albert D'Esterre, who maintains that
the Sontag's singing is not in the first style, and a great deal more
of the same sort; but he might as well endeavour to persuade me that
Ude is inferior to Doveton's present man Mariné. I think Lord Albert
D'Esterre wishes to be thought an oracle, and the superior judge of all
judges, and that without his decree there can be no perfection."

"_Vraiment_," said the Comtesse with a shrug of her shoulders, "I
think Milor might suspend his judgments till he heard if people cared
for dem."

"Ah, how delighted I am Comtesse to hear you say so," cried Sir
William, repeating the words he had first addressed to Lady Tilney, and
which indeed he addressed to every one of _ton_, let what might be the
subject, or the sense that fell from them.

"_Vraiment!_" again came drily from the lips of Comtesse Leinsengen,
accompanied with a look at the speaker, which told him that the
contempt conveyed in that expression, when speaking of Lord Albert,
attached equally to himself. Fully understanding the intended meaning,
and conscious that with the Comtesse Leinsengen he had made much less
way than with Lady Tilney, he turned once more to the latter, and
addressed her on a subject by which he knew well he should pay his
court successfully.

"You were not at Lady Borrowdale's the other night. You never saw such
a set as were assembled there; positively there was no stirring without
coming in contact with people whom one had never seen before--and then
it is such bad taste to collect such a crowd--for my part, I got away
after the first glance at the affair." Lady Tilney smiled, and Sir
William, encouraged, continued, "Do you dine at Doveton's?"

"I believe so."

"I am delighted to hear you say so. Lord Osbalston asked me for the
same day--but Mariné, you know, lives with Doveton now, and he could
always turn the scale with me" (laughing affectedly); "_Apropos_,
might I venture to ask the honour of your partaking of my rustic fare?
I am living, you know, quite _en garçon_; but it would be a variety,
so different from all you meet elsewhere; so very plain, and so very
humble; and you would of course do me the honour to name your own
party. Might I hope that you too, Comtesse, would condescend so far?"

This was the boldest step Sir William Temple had yet taken; and
he stood in proportionate anxiety, breathless and red, awaiting a
reply which was to confirm or crush his hopes. May be, like a second
Cæsar, he felt that he had crossed the limits of the empire, and
saw that victory only could retrieve what he had hazarded, and that
he must rise or fall by that. If victory did attend him, then, like
another Alexander, he might weep for fresh worlds to conquer; but if
he fell,--"oh! what a fall was there, my friends!" Such feelings, no
doubt, did agitate his swelling breast when he saw the interchange of
looks pass between Lady Tilney and her friend, as if they questioned
each other.

"Shall we gratify this man?" (this fool he would have read, could
he have interpreted the Countess Leinsengen's expression): "shall
we countenance him?" and in the tremendous moment of suspense Sir
William blest his stars that there were none by to mark him. But when
the joyful sound of Lady Tilney's voice pronounced an acceptance of
his petition, he would have given every thing, short of the promised
honour itself, that the whole Opera house had been present to witness
his triumph. "You will receive us _en garçon_, Sir William, dat will
be very good," said the Comtesse Leinsengen: "all I bargain for is dat
there should be no misses--dose unmarried women are always in de way."

Sir William was too much intoxicated with joy--too much absorbed
with the prospect of his increasing consequence in the eyes of the
fashionable world, when it should be announced that he had entertained
the Comtesse Leinsengen, Lady Tilney, and a party of distinguished
personages to dinner, at his house in May Fair, to pay attention to
any thing not immediately connected with the results which that dinner
would produce. He had heard not one word distinctly beyond the promised
acceptance of his invitation; although he continued mechanically to
reply, whenever he imagined himself addressed. "I am so glad to hear
you say so!--I am delighted to hear that!" At last, on recovering
a little, he perceived that Lady Tilney and her friend had entered
into an argument on the subject of the unmarried ladies, to whom
the Comtesse had alluded, and in which his dinner seemed entirely
forgotten, or likely to be so.

"Dey are always tinking of settlements, and jewels, and have nothing
to do but take notice of what oders are doing," rejoined the Comtesse
Leinsengen, in her most thrilling tone: "Our way is much de better dan
yours; we marry our children at once, or put them in de convents: dat
settles de matter, and make dem much happier too."

"I am not quite so sure of that point, my dear Comtesse," said Lady
Tilney, "although I own ladies are bores; but we manage the thing
in _our_ way, and as well at least: we let them _seem_ to please
themselves, which is half the battle towards making them satisfied with
the lot they draw, and we ourselves direct the entire _marche du jeu_.
You know I am for liberty in all things; liberty of choice as well as
conscience; but very young people do not know what they wish and it
is only when a little acquainted with the world that any body can be
said to have a choice." Sir William Temple remained in torture during
this discussion, and more than once wished all the unmarried ladies
in London, who thus seemed to step in between himself and fortune,
at the bottom of the sea. At length, tired, but not convinced, Lady
Tilney left her opponent in the middle of a sentence, and turning to
the unhappy Sir William, asked, "for what day shall I make our party at
your house?"

"I am delighted to hear you say that!" was the prompt and very sincere
answer of the person addressed. "Oh, any day you do me the honour to
appoint."

"Dat dinner of yours, Sir William, oh vraiment je me fais fête d'y
penser," cried the Comtesse Leinsengen, turning abruptly round to him,
and determined that her rival in argument should not have even that
subject entirely her own.

"I hate vaiting and puts off; we vill fix de day at once--vat say
you to Sunday? to-morrow--de Sunday is always frightful dull in your
country; 'tis the only day, besides, in which I am disengaged."

"I'm so glad to hear you say so," replied Sir William, "let it be
to-morrow," turning at the same time with a look of inquiry to Lady
Tilney.

"Oh, after church there is no objection to diverting one's-se1f
innocently; it is impossible to read and pray all day: besides I like
to make the Sunday, on principle, a gay, chearful day."

At this moment Lord Albert D'Esterre entered. "Shall I ask him for
to-morrow?" eagerly whispered Sir William into Lady Tilney's ear;
afraid lest the subject nearest his heart should again be usurped by
some other topic.

"Yes--no--yes, you may;" replied Lady Tilney; whose answer in the
affirmative was decided by her wish to know more of Lord Albert in
society, and a little also by Comtesse Leinsengen's having held cheap
her penetration in regard to the qualifications of the former for their
_société choisie_. The invitation was quickly given, and no excuse
would be admitted. While Lord Albert was endeavouring to extricate
himself from this importunity, and Sir William to convince him of
the impossibility of disobeying Lady Tilney's commands, which he
advanced to strengthen his cause, the Comtesse Leinsengen caught the
conversation:

"So, Milor, you will not be at de party to-morrow? an excuse vraiment!
when de people make _me excuse_, I know what dat means, and it is made
up in my mind never to ask dem again."

"When you have once expressed that horrible sentence," answered Lord
Albert, smiling, "it would surely be impossible to incur so great a
danger; but as I am really not able to give my assent to the very
obliging invitation, I shall not, I hope, be deemed deserving of the
penalty."

"What! _then_ you will _not_ accept?" asked the Comtesse Leinsengen
again, in her own abrupt tone of command.

"No; I lament I cannot." The Comtesse shrugged her shoulders, adding:

"What! you will not accept, I suppose, because it is Sunday; and you
are engaged all de day long to de Church; is it not dat--are you what
dey call a saint?" Lord Albert felt annoyed by the importunity with
which he had been assailed; and conceiving, according to his own ideas
of good breeding, that declining an invitation at first was sufficient,
he continued to look more grave and annoyed. Still as the Comtesse
repeated the question:

"Are you what dey call a saint?"

"No, a sinner certainly; but would I were indeed a saint."

"So den you condemn us all, I suppose, who do not keep de Sunday
stupidly _à la façon Angloise_? Vill you tell me now, Milor, vat you
tink one may do on a Sunday? I suppose you would not hang your cat,
_par exemple_, if she killed her mouse on Sunday, vould you?"

Lord Albert D'Esterre looked still more cold and grave, as he drew
himself up and leant against the back of the box, saying, that "it was
an unfitting time and place for such discussions, and that he begged
to be excused from entering upon them." Then bending forward to Lady
Tilney, who had remained silent, and saying a few words to her, he
bowed and retired.

"Il est farouche et fanfaron au possible," cried the Comtesse
Leinsengen, as he closed the door; "after to-night I have done vid him."

"He is only original; and it will be a great thing to soften his little
prejudices, and teach him to enjoy existence under your tuition,
if it were possible," said Sir William, making as low a bow as his
_embonpoint_ would permit, "'_to soften knotted oaks, and bend the
rocks_,' it would be done--"

Lady Tilney smiled at the mis-quotation, while the Comtesse Leinsengen
added in a tone of impatience: "but Miladi, do vat she vill, cannot
make a bore agreeable; but, ah!" turning round, "dere is Milor
Baskerville, how glad I am to have something humanized to talk to!
Milor, we have just had a saint in our box; do you not smell de odour
of sanctity very strong?"

"I am at a loss to know your meaning, Comtesse--pray explain;" and
when she did so, he replied; "Hem! from the first moment I saw him, I
suspected that stiff unnatural sort of manner had something sinister,
(hem!) I hope I am not worse than my neighbours, (hem!) but whenever
I hear any thing approaching to cant (hem!) I fly from it, (hem!) as
I would from all that I hold most detestable; (hem!) besides, since
his conduct to Tonnerre, I have considered him (hem!) hardly in the
light of a gentleman. (hem!) You heard, Comtesse, did you not, of that
affair? (hem!)"

"No, vat _affaire_ you speak of?"

"Oh, you know he nearly caused Tonnerre a most serious accident, and
(hem!) his favourite horse Chester, it is feared, is entirely ruined."

"No, I never heard one word of it, vat was it for?"--"Why, Tonnerre
(hem!) was riding up gently to speak (hem!) to Lady Hamlet Vernon
in the Park, (hem!) my Lord Albert D'Esterre, who was by her
carriage, (hem!) chose to turn his horse short round, and to shew his
horsemanship, spurred the animal, who plunged and kicked, and (hem!)
Tonnerre's horse was driven against the carriage and reared, and fell
back--(hem!) and--"

"And what did de oder Milor do--did he tumble off?"

"Yes, (hem!) at least I believe he did, but I don't know--we were all
so engaged, (hem!) in assisting Tonnerre--the last I saw of him was his
horse going through the Park Gate like a shot, for he can't ride."

"Baskerville," interrupted Lord Glenmore, who had entered the box,
and, while talking with Lady Tilney, had overheard the latter part of
this veracious history,--"Baskerville, you must pardon me if I correct
your statement a little. _You_ may have _heard_ the circumstances
only related, _I saw_ them--and if ever a man deserved having his
neck broke, and losing a favourite horse, it was Tonnerre. I never
witnessed any thing like the manner in which he rode, not _to_ Lady
Hamlet Vernon's carriage, _but at_ D'Esterre, and if the latter had
not been the excellent horseman he is, I think there might have been
more serious results accruing to both than actually happened. However,
Tonnerre and his horse are quite well, for I met both to-day." Lord
Baskerville had a mode of dropping the corners of his mouth, raising
his chin, and turning up his eyes, whenever he wished to shew signs
of contempt; but too discreet to offend a person of Lord Glenmore's
calibre, he managed to suppress them in some measure; and having heard
out what Lord Glenmore had to say, turned without answering him to the
Comtesse Leinsengen.

"Do not talk more about dat man, I pray you, I am tired to death of
his name," said the latter; "but tell me, Milor, vill you and Miladi
Baskerville meet me to-morrow at dinner? Miladi Tilney and myself are
going to do Sir William dere de honour to dine vid him, and vid our own
party."

Lord Baskerville looked amazed, and before he could recover his
surprise, Sir William himself seemingly confirmed the strange
announcement, by facing round and assuring _Baskerville_, as he called
him, on the strength of many a good dinner before, that "he should be
delighted to see him; and Lady Baskerville too, I hope will confer
the same honour upon me as these ladies." Lord Baskerville, ere he
answered, directed a look of inquiry to the Comtesse Leinsengen, to
ascertain if the matter were really serious.--"Oh, you must come vid
me," said the Comtesse, "I positively vill have no excuse."

"I am ever ready to obey your commands, Comtesse, you know, and--"

"I am delighted to hear you say so," cried Sir William. (Lord
Baskerville drew up.) "And Lady Baskerville?" continued the former.

"Hem! _I_ cannot _answer for Lady_ Baskerville, Sir William--but (hem!
hem!) I will certainly inform her of the invitation, and (hem!) should
she have no other engagement, (hem!) doubtless she will be most happy,
and (hem!) will wait upon you; (hem!) but dear me the Opera is ended,"
looking at his watch, and turning to Lady Tilney. "Oh those tiresome
bishops--really I wish people would not meddle with what (hem!) they
have nothing to do,--we are always now deprived of half our ballet on
the Saturdays." (hem!)

"_C'est vraiment ridicule_," murmured the Comtesse Leinsengen: "dere is
no country in de world where dis sort of foolish ting takes place but
in England."

"It is rather an infringement upon our liberties, I will allow,"
observed Lady Tilney, "to turn us out of our Opera boxes at a
particular hour."

"Liberty--liberty--dat liberty of the subject is all a farce, chere
Miladi; it is all a make believe, as I often have de honour of telling
you. Lord Baskerville, vill you be so obliging--my schall."

Lady Tilney, however, would not suffer the Comtesse to go till she
had spoken to her again on the subject of their _soirée_ at Lady
de Chere's. "The Duchess of Hermanton's night will be a very good
opportunity," she said; "to let the world know that we do not mingle in
societies of the kind; all the regulars, as they consider themselves,
look upon D'Hermanton House as head-quarters, and make a point of
attending like subalterns gaping for promotion; and if we are there
it will have the worst possible effect. Then again, such as we choose
to invite to Lady de Chere's, will understand what is meant, _sans
nous compromettre_, and hold off in future from engagements like the
D'Hermanton's. You know it would be unwise and impolitic to impart our
intentions to all indiscriminately who compose our circle; but we must
at the same time afford some guide for conduct. If we do as I propose
the affair will be very well understood, without our being unpleasantly
involved, and the system will answer well, n'êtes vous pas de mon
avis, chere Comtesse?"--"Peût-être qu'oui," was the Comtesse's answer,
accompanied by the habitual shrug of the shoulders; "and," continued
Lady Tilney, "I think there was every one at my house the other night
who ought to be invited. Shall I send Lady de Chere my list?"

"I will see about dat; but first we must know if Miladi vil do as
we wish. Laissez-moi faire, j'arrangerai tout ça," and taking Lord
Baskerville's arm, she was leaving the box--

"But what shall we do about dat dinner to-morrow, chere Miladi?" she
added in a lower tone to Lady Tilney.

"Oh go, by all means; he is well enough--will be so pleased that we may
do henceforth as we like with him, and it allows others to hope for the
same honour."

"Vell, den, I vill go--remember Milor you are engaged to me to-morrow."
Lord Baskerville made one of his most refined bows. "And who else shall
we have?" asked the Comtesse of Lady Tilney.

"Oh! I don't know; there are the Boileaus and Lord Gascoyne, and Prince
Luttermanne, and Lord Tonnerre."

"Dose vill do very well; I vill tell dem if I see dem in de room.
Adieu, chere Miladi. Ve shall dine vid you to-morrow, Sir William," she
added as she left the box.

"I am delighted to hear you say so!" replied the happy Sir William
Temple.

"May this be true!--O may it--can it be;--Is it by any wonder
possible?" whispered Spencer Newcombe, who had heard the Comtesse
Leinsengen's last words, and now approached Sir William with affected
surprise.

"Come, my master; if so, the great ones shall not have you all to
themselves," he continued: "I too will dine with you to-morrow. Lady
Tilney, are you of the party?"

"Yes."

"Why, where is the sign now? have ye e'er a calendar--where's the sign,
trow you?" Spencer continued saying.

"The what?" asked Sir William.

"The sign--Believe me there's a most secret power in that! Court any
woman in the right sign, Sir William, as you have done, and you shall
not miss."

"I am delighted to hear you say so!" replied Sir William.

"I believe he thinks you allude to the sign-post of an inn," whispered
Lord Boileau, who had joined the party, "and it suits well enough to a
dinner-giving man like him." Lady Tilney now prepared to leave the box;
and taking the arm of the Duke of Mercington, was followed by all the
men who had paid their visit and their court to her.

Sir William seemed to look with pride on the world behind him, as he
mingled in the crowd; conscious of the mark of fashion which would from
the morrow be emblazoned on his brow; and in the hurry of the throng,
and in the quiet of his pillow, the glory of his future success and
progress alike presented itself to him that night in a thousand forms.




CHAPTER VII.

THE DINNER.


When Lord Baskerville announced to Lady Baskerville the names of those
who composed Sir William Temple's dinner party, she was sufficiently
astonished; but felt there could be no compromise in being present, and
at once accepted his invitation. The affair being considered rather in
the light of a party to Richmond, or some similar gaiety, several of
the guests went together. Prince Luttermanne attended Lady Tilney; the
Boileaus joined Lady Hamlet Vernon; and Lord Baskerville engaged his
friend Lord Tonnerre to accompany himself and Lady Baskerville.

As the carriage of the latter proceeded down ---- street, they passed
the church at the moment when Lord Albert D'Esterre was leaving the
door, after evening service. Lady Baskerville's quick eye immediately
recognized him, although mingled in a crowd of those denominated the
common people; and pointing him out to Lord Tonnerre, the latter asked,
in his usual tone of command,

"What can _he_ be doing in that crowd?"

"Isn't it Sunday?" rejoined Lord Baskerville, yawning. "He has been, I
suppose, (hem!) to some conventicle. (hem!)"

"Yes, he looks like one of those d--d Methodists, who would ring people
to church from morning to night, by G--;" (Lord Tonnerre forgot that
swearing was no longer a fashionable vice) "they ought to be scouted
from society."

"True," replied Lord Baskerville, "I think (hem!) that it would do a
great deal of good to society, if (hem!) they were all run up, _à la
lanterne_."

"Ay, hang them--hang them as high as you can see," continued Lord
Tonnerre; "rid the land of them any how. There's my father--I wish _he_
had them for once in his hands; there's not a stricter person on earth
than my father; he'll suffer no immorality, he'll have no profligacy
in the family; but if one of these canting rascals was ever known to
cross his door, or to be found on his estates, he'd make short work
with him--he'd send him away with marks which the fellow would carry
to his grave,--by G-- would he. All this comes, however, from the
manner in which we pass our Sundays. I hate foreigners and all their
d--d ways; but they act more sensibly than we do in regard to Sunday:
they let the people amuse themselves after church. It's right to go to
church, and all that,--that I'll allow; but I am sure the common people
would be much better afterwards with what is fitting for them, quoits,
or nine-holes, or cricket, or something to busy them with, instead of
going to Methodist meetings, where they turn saints, merely because
they have no better amusement; unless, indeed, it be the alehouse."

"And there get drunk," remarked Lady Baskerville; "that would be
vastly better, vastly more moral. When you and Baskerville rule the
state, things will be much better managed, no doubt." This was said
half sneeringly; for Lady Baskerville for some reason was not in very
good humour.

"Hem!" rejoined Lord Baskerville; "I must beg your Ladyship would limit
what you say to yourself. It is (hem!) a liberty I _never_ take _with
you_, to say what you _would_ or would _not_ do (hem!)" Upon this a
silence ensued in the trio; when a few minutes broke the awkwardness
occasioned by it, and they found themselves arrived at Sir William
Temple's door.

Lord Tonnerre offered his arm to Lady Baskerville as they alighted;
while Lord Baskerville, to avoid the unfashionable appearance of
entering the room with his wife, stopped, seemingly for the purpose of
giving orders to his servants, till such time as he imagined he could
walk in alone. There were arrived of the party only Lady Tilney and
Prince Luttermanne. Lord Baskerville, having made his bow, retired
to a sofa, discomposed at finding that the Comtesse Leinsengen, on
whose appearance he had staked the whole of his consequence, and the
excuse of his presence, was not yet come. Lord Tonnerre too, displeased
that Sir William Temple continued to occupy Lady Baskerville with the
profusion of his acknowledgments for the honour done him, and that Lady
Tilney appeared too much engaged to notice any one, stood for some
moments in gloomy silence, when at length Lord Somerton entered.

"How d'ye do, Somerton?--glad to see you," was Sir William's salutation
to his guest, as he held out a finger to him, and continued talking to
Lady Baskerville.

"Tonnerre," said Lord Somerton, turning away from this brief reception
with a degree of contempt; "come aside, I have something to tell
you;" when a deep discussion on matters interesting and intelligible
to the former seemed to ensue, since it was productive of a partial
relaxation of the scowl which generally characterized his face when he
felt himself, as in the present instance, overlooked, or when subjects
indifferent to him, or above his comprehension, were alluded to.

Lady Tilney, hitherto absorbed in her conversation with Prince
Luttermanne, now looked up, and addressing Lady Baskerville with an air
of protection, invited her to come and take the seat next to her. "What
a vastly pretty cap you have on!--do tell me where you got it; and, my
dear Lady Baskerville, if you have nothing better to do, pray don't
forget to come to me to-morrow night. Have you seen any thing of Lord
Albert D'Esterre to-day? What do _you_ think of him? _I_ can hardly
understand him yet; sometimes I think one thing, sometimes another.
They say he is a Methodist--how extraordinary! if he was not young, or
not handsome, or not _d'une bonne tournure_, one might suppose such a
thing; but as it is I don't believe it--do you?"

"I have not seen enough of him to judge," was the cautious reply
(for Lady Baskerville could be cautious where so deep a stake was at
hazard as fashionable consideration); "but I think he rather affects
singularity."

"Perhaps so; but then you know he will soon correct that fault when he
has lived a little longer amongst us. I have heard that he is engaged
to be married;--do you know if it is true?"

"I did hear," said Lady Baskerville, "something about a Lady Adeline
Seymour, a cousin of his who has been brought up in the shades, and is
said to be a world's wonder of beauty, and purity, and perfection; but
the engagement was an affair of the papa's and mamma's, and probably
the parties themselves will hate each other in consequence."

At this moment the Comtesse Leinsengen was announced, and then
followed Lord and Lady Boileau, Lady Hamlet Vernon, Mr. Spencer
Newcombe, and Lord Gascoigne, each received with that portion and kind
of welcome which marked a well-studied knowledge of Debrett on the part
of Sir William Temple, who felt himself the deity of the day, and who,
complimentary, facetious, pompous, _affairé_, and familiar by turns,
according to the _calibre_ of the person he addressed, moved about
the apartments like some presiding Joss or Amsterdam Cupid. The whole
party were at length assembled, the dinner announced, and the company
withdrew to enjoy the very best _artiste's_ best efforts, put forth on
an occasion so replete with honour and distinction to his _employé_.
Lord Baskerville contrived to place himself next to the Comtesse
Leinsengen, whose hand, in her _qualité d'ambassadrice_, the master of
the feast had shewn his skill in precedence by soliciting, as he led
the way to the dining-room; a circumstance, by the way, fortunate for
him on his _début_, for although Lord Baskerville's arm would have been
far more agreeable, yet the Comtesse would never have pardoned such a
neglect of her grade in favour of her dear friend Lady Tilney.

Of the other arrangements of the party it would be unnecessary to
speak, and equally useless to catalogue the dinner itself. It is
known to all that in London, after the first few weeks of the season,
every one's table who gives a dinner is covered in exactly the same
way--there may be degrees of excellence in the flavour and science of
the dishes; but the things themselves are, as the Geneva traveller said
of travelling, "_toujours la même chose, toutes les villes sont les
mêmes, vous avez des maisons à droite et des maisons à gauche--et la
rue au milieu--c'est toujours la même chose_."

It is true there are certain critical periods in a spring season,
in which nature's fruits, still immatured, are brought to perfection
by the fostering hand of man; and on these the deep and skilful in
gastronomy will seize as apt occasions for a display of superior taste
and refinement; then, and then only is it, as is well known, that
cucumbers are lawful, green peas to be suffered, and strawberries and
peaches tolerated; but beyond this there is even yet another point--"a
grace beyond the reach of art"--the very North Pole of elegance--the
paradox, it may be called, of the gastronomic system--it is to display
these productions when positively they are not to be got. Happy the man
who so succeeds--thrice happy Sir William, that on this day the stars
so ordered it, that while London was yet innocent of cucumbers or peas,
you should be profuse of both;--that when peaches and strawberries had
not so much as crossed the thoughts of the most refined, they too in
abundance graced your board. Oh! happy consummation of those honours,
which from the last evening seemed about to centre round your head, and
raise you to the pinnacle of gastronomy and of _ton_. During the first
moments of all dinners a very few monosyllables are uttered--a sort of
murmuring conversation then ensues between the parties nearest each
other,--till at last one individual more gifted or more hardy than the
rest hazards a remark across the table, and the talking becomes general.

It was Lady Tilney who on the present occasion broke the monotony
of those half-audible sounds that whispered round the table. "Lord
Gascoigne," she said aloud, "I hope you are really going to put down
that vile newspaper, The ----, it is a disgrace to London."

"I should have thought that you, Lady Tilney, would rather have upheld
a paper of its principles, and which affords such a proof of what you
always profess to have so much at heart--the liberty of the press."

"You must pardon me, it has nothing to do with the liberty of the
press,--but a great deal with its abuse,--besides, the liberty of the
press applies only to politics--not to private affairs."

"_C'est selon_," replied Lord Gascoigne with provoking suavity of
manner; "if we publish ourselves what we do, we court public remark."

"She cannot forget or forgive," whispered Spencer Newcombe to Lord
Baskerville, "that she herself was once the target at which some of the
severest shots of this paper were sent."

"How?" asked the latter.

"Why, when, for party's sake, she was once about to take a step.... I
cannot tell you about it now--some other time," he added, as he turned
to Lady Boileau, who had asked the same question of him thrice.

"Publish ourselves! my dear Lord," continued Lady Tilney to Lord
Gascoigne, "why we never do that if our actions attract notice from our
situation."

"They should be more looked to," was the reply of the latter,
interrupting her; "if there is nothing to censure, the satirist's
occupation is gone."

"Vraiment Milor treats de subject en moraliste, and as if himself vas
a paragon of excellence dat could not err. Pray, Milor, do you always
tink so wisely on vat you do, dat you never do nothing wrong yourself?"

"Oh, do wrong--yes a thousand times a day, Comtesse,--but when I do,
I do not quarrel with the world because it will not think me right,
nor if it call me a fool or a knave, am I angry--for perhaps it is a
truth--at any rate, other and better men than I have been called the
same."

"It is an execrable paper," said Lady Tilney; "and ought to be burnt by
the hangman."

"It is an abominable ting," said the Comtesse Leinsengen, "and would
not be suffered in any country but England."--Lady Tilney would have
interrupted her, but the Comtesse was bent on proceeding: "I repeat,
as I have often had de honor to tell you, dat de English are a people
of contradictions; dey talk always of dere great _purité_,--dere
_virtue_--and den suffer so quietly all dose vile tings to be said of
dem in de public prints." Lord Gascoigne, who did not care one straw
what was said either of himself or any one else, perceiving he had
sufficiently fanned the growing indignation of Lady Tilney by his
apparent callousness to public attack, for a moment remained silent,
amused to hear the topic discussed in other hands. Lady Tilney loved
argument, and for its sake often adopted opinions which at other times
she would as strongly have opposed.

"If the things alluded to _are done_," she continued, addressing
herself to the Comtesse Leinsengen, "they are _better told_--I always
like every thing to be told."

"Vid de exception always, ma chere amie, of vat concerns one's-self,"
replied the Comtesse sharply.

"But I deny that there is any truth," rejoined Lady Tilney, not
appearing to notice this last remark; "I deny that there is any truth
in any thing that comes through such an abominable channel as that
paper; all its remarks are the offspring of impertinent malice or
envious vulgarity, and all its facts, falsehoods."

"Hem!" said Lord Baskerville, in his slowest and most imposing tone,
"these things have always been, Lady Tilney, and always will be. Some
satirist or other, (hem!) has always lived since the Flood, from
Lycophron down to our own day, to lash the vice and follies of the
age, as _they_ say; but in fact to indulge that spleen which is common
to the canaille at all periods. And after all, what does it signify?
Nobody thinks about any thing that is said of any body--hem!--nine days
after it is said--hem!"

"If I ever saw _my_ name in that d--d paper," exclaimed Lord Tonnerre,
while his brow was knit in tremendous frowns, "if ever allusion were
made to me--the writer should eat his words."

"My dear Tonnerre," rejoined Lord Gascoigne, once more taking up the
conversation, "you would find he has an ostrich's stomach. But why
should such a toy trouble you?"

"By G----, the writer shall suffer," replied Lord Tonnerre, furiously,
"he shall suffer--he shall pay--"

"Who," asked Lady Boileau quietly, "who shall pay?"

"The scoundrel--the ---- who has dared to use my name," answered Lord
Tonnerre, after several efforts at utterance, which his passion for
some moments impeded.

"But you must discover _who_ is the _who_," replied Lord Gascoigne,
with provoking calmness of manner.--"Junius himself was never hid so
successfully as is this writer. You will find it fencing in the dark,
Tonnerre, if you meddle with him.--But I see you are angry; now take my
advice, when you are so use this antidote--it is an excellent rule I
learned from my grandfather--repeat your alphabet; and that being done,
your anger will be over too." Lord Tonnerre's face moved convulsively
in every muscle, and his whole frame seemed to writhe under the words
of Lord Gascoigne.

"He boils like a pot," whispered Spencer Newcombe.

"Oh, do not vex him, pray," said Lady Baskerville; "he is _only
nervous_."

"Mad, mad!" rejoined Lord Gascoigne, "pray take heed." With many hems
and ha's, Sir William Temple remarked, that for his part he thought it
cruel to delight in mischief; that to him it always appeared a most
uncharitable practice to wound another's feelings--and somewhat rude
too; fit only for the vulgar.

"The pleasure or amusement," he continued, "of saying ill-natured
things is quite beyond my comprehension--quite inconceivable. I
remember, when I used to live a good deal at D---- House, there was a
rule established that no one should notice, remark, or seem to observe
what was passing;--it was considered so very vulgar to interfere
with other people's affairs--all were left at large without account
or question--and the consequence was, there never was any thing so
enchanting since the world began as that society--so _suave_, so
equal, so gentle, so serene;--not a voice ever heard louder than a
whisper--every one so well amused, every one so well employed, that
_ennui_ was unknown. There never was any thing to compare to that
society."

"_De graces!_" exclaimed the Comtesse Leinsengen, as Sir William
concluded this effusion of his reminiscences, "_de graces!_ do not tell
us, Sir Villiam, of _vat_ VAS: to talk of _tings_ gone being delightful
is like telling a woman who is _passée_, 'I remember when you were so
admired.' De ting to talk of is _to-day_."

"Oh, of course," rejoined Sir William, taking the Comtesse's last words
_au pied de la lettre_, "of course the society of to-day--the society
_here_--is _par excellence_, the most delightful in the world." A nod
here passed between Spencer Newcombe and Lord Gascoigne, indicative of
Sir William having escaped from his blunders with more adroitness than
they had given him credit for; and at the same moment the ladies rose
to depart.

"_Vraiment_," exclaimed the Comtesse Leinsengen, as she entered the
drawing-rooms, "I do tink, as we are de deities of dis fête, ces
messieurs might for once have broken through dere abominable customs,
and accompanied us; but dat terrible Lord Somerton and dat young milor
Tonnerre would tink, I suppose, de constitution in danger, if dey did
not remain at de table after de ladies.--I vonder, Miladi Baskerville,
comme Milor est votre éléve, dat you do not teach him better."

"Dear Comtesse, not I, I assure you--it is quite enough to take care
of one's-self; I never interfere with other people's affairs--nothing
would induce me to undertake any body's education."

"I believe you are very wise," said Lady Boileau; "the _laissez faire_
and the _laissez aller_ is the best rule."

"I do not quite agree with you in that," said Lady Tilney; "how could
we have a pleasant or a distinguished society if that system was
allowed to prevail? how could we--"

"La! what sinifies dat?" said the Comtesse Leinsengen, as she arranged
her _bérin_ at the glass; "_Vos milliners ne valent rien_--I have just
sent to Paris, and then I shall have a _coiffure_ that will not be so
hideous."

"Did you observe the Duchesse D'Hermanton's last dress?" asked Lady
Baskerville; "she did think it was perfection; one feather on the top
of another, flower upon flower, flounce upon flounce, jewel upon jewel,
till she was one mass of moving millinery--I never saw such a figure
since the days of Lady Aveling's ambassadress' glory."

"Vat sinifie vat dose women do? D'ailleurs les Angloises ont toujours
singé les modes." In this, and similar conversation, passed the hour of
separation in the drawing-rooms, while at the dinner-table the subject
of discussion possessed as little interest as is generally found in
society so constituted.

"Baskerville, Boileau, Gascoigne," said Sir William Temple, as he
resumed his chair after the departure of the ladies, "will you not come
up, and in the short absence we are doomed to suffer from our fair
companions, let us find comfort in this poor earthly Nectar?" (Sir
William believed his wines to be the best in creation.) "Baskerville,
what wine do you take?"

"Claret," was the reply of the latter, accompanied by a look of
surprise which seemed to say, "of course."--"Did you ever hear such a
question!" he added in an under-tone to Lord Boileau.

"Never--he might as well have asked if one would try Chambertin
after _Truites à l'Aurore_, or _Clos de Voguet_ after _Bécasses à la
Luculle_!" rejoined Lord Baskerville.

"Fools were made for jests to men of sense," whispered Spencer Newcomb,
"and I know of no one who affords more amusement than my friend there,
Sir William."

"How officious and _affairé_ he was in contriving this party," said
Lord Gascoigne.

"And how puzzled, lame, and lost in prosecuting it!" rejoined the other.

"He is a most substantial ass," said Lord Baskerville.

"Tonnerre," asked Sir William at the moment, and affecting to vary the
theme, according to the taste of the person, "Do you know which is the
favourite for the Derby?"

"Gad, he turns his words as many ways as a lathe," whispered Lord
Gascoigne again--"understands all subjects alike, and is as learned as
the occult philosopher of Hudibras."

"And as much renowned for profound and solid stupidity," rejoined the
latter. A laugh escaped at these words; and as their "ha! ha! ha!"
passed round, Sir William laughed louder.

"Very good that, Spencer, I just caught the end of it--the point is
always in the tail you know."

"He caught it," said Lord Gascoigne, repeating the words, and looking
at Spencer Newcomb; "do you think he did?"

"If it was with his mouth, he might certainly--for it is large enough
to catch any thing--and he is welcome; I give him my jest for his
dinner, it is the only return I ever make."

"And you thrive on your bargain generally, Spencer, I should suppose."

"How long do you think I took from Penzance to town?" said Lord
Tonnerre aloud; and without waiting for any reply added,--"Eighteen
hours by ----, in hack chaises too, changing every stage."

"_I_ do not conceive it much to do," rejoined Lord Baskerville. "I
remember, (hem!) once leaving town seven hours after the mail; and
though I had rips of horses, I arrived, (hem!) at twenty minutes before
his Majesty's stage coach, (hem!)"

"Well," said Lord Gascoigne, "well, Basky, that is excellent,--ha! ha!
ha! that is excellent,--ha! ha! ha!" The abbreviation of his patronymic
was always distasteful to Lord Baskerville, and on this occasion he not
only felt his dignity compromised by the license of Lord Gascoigne's
address, but was himself offended by the covert suspicion conveyed
of the substantiality of the fact he had related; turning therefore
away with an air of contempt, he addressed himself to another of the
party. Lord Gascoigne, however, was not so easily to be silenced, and
exchanging looks with those who had watched the scene, added, with very
provoking calmness,

"Basky, you were not offended, I hope, with any thing I said, I meant
only--"

"Not at all," replied Lord Baskerville, the corners of his mouth
dropping in the exact angle of scorn by which, as a mathematical man of
_ton_, he would have described his contempt of the speaker,--"not at
all, Gascoigne; I beg you won't think of it;"--and he turned again to
the party with whom he was conversing.

"Beat--beat, Gascoigne," exclaimed Spencer Newcomb.--Lord Baskerville
looked around with a dignified air, and for a moment silence ensued,
not however without a wink passing from Spencer Newcomb, implying that
they had gone as far as was advisable. But Lord Gascoigne was not to be
stopped without a farewell shot, as he added, "Well, Baskerville, we
start at eight, and breakfast at nine, is it not so?" The latter again
tried to look grave, but obliged at length in self-defence to join in
the laugh which followed these words, he let fall for an instant the
mask that too often covered his most trivial actions, and appeared the
good-hearted good-humoured creature nature had made him.

"Somerton," said Sir William Temple, breaking the subject of
conversation, "do you remember when you were at my chateau in the
north?"

"Yes," was the dry reply he received from one who, though he eat
his dinners, held him in the most sovereign disdain, and this "yes"
sounded harshly on the ears of Sir William, living as he did in the
praises bestowed on his establishments, and never losing an opportunity
of referring to the subject of them; nor was he less annoyed, as he
observed a whisper pass between his northern guest and Lord Tonnerre,
to whom Lord Somerton had turned after his very short and laconic
reply, and added,

"The fellow had one covey of partridges, two dozen of Burgundy, and a
mistress; I made love to the one, drank the other, killed the third,
and then quitted."

"Good," said Spencer Newcomb, who had overheard what passed; "he would
have pardoned you, however, the first, if you had praised the others."

"No doubt he would," replied Lord Somerton, "but on my conscience I
could not do it, and I presume he feels this as well as myself, for
I shall make him give me a dinner the first day in the week I am
disengaged." Thus fared Sir William Temple in the hands of those for
whom he had lavished, and _incessantly_ lavished, an expense which, if
properly directed, would have rendered him an amiable, respectable, and
happy individual. As it was, he spent his money on objects despicable
in themselves, and for persons absolutely turning him into ridicule
while enjoying his bounty.

The party from the dining-table soon after arose, some having
attained the object for which alone they came, the enjoyment of
a dinner; others who had yet a further motive, ascended to the
drawing-rooms, and after passing there sufficient time to complete
arrangements, arrange departures, and fix dry points that needed
discussion for the morrow's amusement or occupation, took their
departure also, leaving Sir William Temple to feed on the empty
honour which remained to him, of having entertained in his house in
May-fair so distinguished a party; none of whom, however, beyond the
dinner-living Lord Somerton, Spencer Newcomb, and one or two lordlings,
ever intended to think more of him for the future.




CHAPTER VIII.

THE CONTRAST.


On the evening of Sir William Temple's dinner-party, the invitation
to which Lord Albert had declined, he retired at an early hour to
his study; and having closed his door, he sat some minutes with his
head reclining on his hands, endeavouring to shut out the frivolous
insignificances of many late past evenings, and to recal those of a
very different description and tendency.

A sweet and silvery tone of feeling analogous to a fine Wilson that
hung opposite to his writing-table, shed a serene, self-satisfying
sensation over his mind; it might be a false complacency, yet
complacency for the time being it was--and he opened his writing-box,
in the lid of which was a portrait. This portrait represented a very
youthful girl intently busied in copying a bust, the likeness of
himself. A flush passed over his countenance, his eyes sparkled, and a
genuine sensation of rapture thrilled through his heart, as he said,

"Oh! how superior to all I now see around me--young, innocent,
intelligent, the dignity of human nature is here! Gazing at this image,
I can never err; it would recal me to the path of rectitude were I
ever so inclined to swerve from it." At that moment a letter caught
his attention; it was still unanswered--again he coloured, for it had
remained so since the preceding morning; and such a letter! Now with an
eagerness that would have redeemed the slight, he actually kissed the
opened page; and previous to replying to it, re-perused the following
contents of

 LADY ADELINE SEYMOUR'S LETTER.

 "I think it a long time, dearest Albert, since I have heard from you.
 But then you are so busy, and have so many things to do; whereas I
 have nothing to do, but to count up minutes, days, and hours; yet
 this is so wrong, that I blame myself even for thinking, much more
 for writing the thought; and would blot out the dissatisfied words,
 but that I promised you should know truly, and without disguise, what
 really passed in my mind.

 "After what I heard good Mr. Adams preach last Sunday, how dare I
 wish to hurry on time, when I make so poor a use of it? Indeed, dear
 Albert, when I think seriously, I do not wish it; but when I feel that
 we are parted, and yield to that feeling, why then I am a wayward
 creature. Does not this prove, my dear Albert, how cautiously we ought
 to look into our hearts, since out of them are the issues of life? I
 will do so; I will try to do so, if God will help me; for it is only
 by this watching that I shall render myself at all worthy of you.
 Mamma said to me the other day:

 "'My dear love, remember that marriage is a state necessarily
 imposing many duties, and accumulating many cares; this in its
 happiest instances must ever be the case; it is wisely ordered that
 it should be so. But it is a state honoured by God and man, and opens
 upon a wide field for self-improvement. If entered upon in this view,
 it brings with its pains many delights and consolations, both for
 this world and the next; but if it is engaged in rashly, merely for
 the purpose of running a more unchecked career, or for the unworthy
 purposes of aggrandizement in rank and fortune apart from nobler
 views, it never fails to produce disappointment, and it may be,
 disgust of life and endless misery.'

 "What a terrible picture, my Albert! But I cannot conceive it
 possible that any body should marry from any motive but attachment,
 and therefore I can hardly persuade myself that any of these awful
 consequences are likely to attend on marriage; only my Bible shews me
 the insufficiency of all mere mortal trusts; and Mamma, I know, never
 says what she does not think is true; therefore I must try and prepare
 myself for becoming such a wife to you as will secure our mutual
 felicity. The little book we exchanged on the day you left us, I read
 morning and evening, and as soon as it is finished I begin it again;
 so when you are reading yours, you may be certain we are pronouncing
 the same words, thinking the same thoughts, lifting up our hearts
 together to the God who made us.

 "How thankful we ought to be for good books; are they not messengers
 from heaven? And yet how we slight them. Often, when engaged in my
 morning's duty of reading, my wandering mind turns so frequently
 to drawing, to music, or any other exercise, that at length I
 have punished myself by determining not to have recourse to these
 recreations till I can moderate my ardour for them, and enjoy them
 only as recreations; they _ought not_ to be more--all beyond is
 idolatry. I have of late, too, engaged myself in active duties among
 the poor around our neighbourhood; and my rides to their different
 habitations give me such additional health and spirits, that I am
 always ready to laugh at all Mr. Foley's silly jokes. My heart is so
 light, and I feel so happy--I see no end to all the diverting things
 I have in view, and some day or another when, please God, I am really
 your wife, all the schemes I form for the benefit of those within the
 circle of my influence will be fully realized.

 "What an extended sphere of usefulness will then be mine, and oh!
 my Albert! what an awful responsibility too will then attach to my
 situation! I pray daily that I may be enabled to meet it as I ought.
 What I grudge most is, the time which I am now frequently forced to
 lose, in being civil to our dull neighbours here; and I do confess
 that to sit amused by Miss Grimsdale's side, while she talks over
 the last county ball, or to listen to old Lady Henniker's history
 of her ménage with becoming patience, is a trial for which no
 self-complacency in the idea, that I am making a sacrifice to oblige
 others, does in any degree compensate. But Mamma smiles when she hears
 me answering _tout a rebours_, and sees my fingers entangling the
 silks, and tells me afterwards that we are not to live to ourselves,
 and that in fact to please others, when not neglecting, any positive
 duty, is a minor virtue. I am sure she is right--but, dear Albert, I
 feel on such occasions how difficult it is to be good! Mr. Foley, to
 whom I expressed myself thus the other day, told me, 'I talked a great
 deal of nonsense, though I was a very charming person altogether,'
 and ended by asking me seriously--'What wrong I thought it possible
 I could do, living as I did?' How ignorant he must be of the state
 of the human heart, not to know that our best efforts are faulty,
 our purest actions imperfect! I stared at him, and then attempted to
 explain to him that all our thoughts, words, and actions, are marked
 with inherent error. He stared at me in return, and, looking at me
 incredulously, asked 'do you really mean what you say?'

 "'Most assuredly,' I replied; 'can any one mean otherwise?' Then he
 looked very grave indeed, sighed heavily, and said, 'it was a sad
 thing to see one so fair and young imbued with such false ideas--ideas
 which in the end would make me wretched.' I laughed, as I assured him
 that it was he that was deceived, and who would be wretched; that as
 for myself, I was the gayest, happiest creature upon earth; and all
 I had to dread was, loving the world too well, and seeing it in too
 fair a light. I had not a corner of my heart, I said, unoccupied, or
 a minute in the day unemployed; and besides that, my reliance upon
 God made me feel as if I never could be perfectly unhappy under any
 circumstances.

 "But no sooner were these words uttered, than my heart smote me,
 for I thought of _you_, dear Albert, and suddenly a cloud seemed to
 pass over me, and my deceitful heart sickened at the thought of the
 possibility of losing you; and then I knew how ill I was prepared to
 yield that perfect obedience which we are called upon to yield to the
 will of heaven.--I believe my countenance betrayed somewhat of this
 self-condemning spirit, for Mr. Foley quickly asked, whilst fixing his
 searching eyes on mine, 'What, is there _nothing_ which could make you
 miserable?' and I trembled, and blushed, and felt a tear of shame rise
 in my eye, as I answered:

 "'Perhaps I deceive myself, and think of myself too highly.
 Perhaps--in short--at all events, I know that I am _trying_ so to
 feel, and so to think.' He laughed contemptuously, saying:

 "'I guessed how it was--poor Lady Adeline! this false system is
 spreading fearfully indeed!' What could he mean? Mamma told me on my
 repeating to her this conversation, 'that to many persons Mr. Foley
 would be a dangerous man; but not to you, my child; and I have a
 love for that wayward creature, the son of the dearest friend I ever
 possessed, which makes me incline to overlook his faults, and hope
 that he will amend them. Who knows but the mode of life we lead may
 be the means of sowing some good seed in his heart? However, my dear
 child, encourage not his conversation on such points.' I believe Mamma
 is right, for notwithstanding my dislike of his irreligious tenets, he
 is so well-informed, and so very diverting, that I cannot help being
 entertained by him. And in many respects I assure you, Albert, he is a
 good man, and general report bespeaks him such. He is very charitable;
 is kind to people in distress; and goes regularly to church, when he
 is with us--is not all this very unaccountable with his strange way
 of talking to me? I do not understand it, and indeed it is not worth
 thinking much about, one way or the other. Write to me, dear Albert,
 and tell me what your opinion is upon this subject. I wish in all
 things to conform to your wishes, and to model my opinion on yours:
 for I well know your excellent principles and unerring judgment.
 To-morrow, I allow myself to return to the delight of copying your
 dear bust, '_O che festa!_'--Sometimes (I am almost ashamed of telling
 you) I divert myself with putting my caps and hats on it, and please
 myself with the idea that it is very like _me_--do not laugh and call
 me 'foolish child!' Now I dislike that _you_ should call me child;
 remember the day you receive this I shall be seventeen, so put on all
 your gravity and consider me with due respect.

 "The menagerie is thriving; I visit our pets every day, and you will
 find them in fine condition when you return,--when will that be? I
 wish the time were come, don't you? Good night, good night, for there
 is no end to this writing. I must end. Again good night. Dearest
 Albert, I am, heart and soul, your own

       "ADELINE SEYMOUR."

"Sweet, pure Adeline!" cried Lord Albert, "how shall I answer
this letter." He seized a pen, and in the first glow of fondness
and admiration, which such a letter and such a portrait before him
inspired, he filled two pages, not less tender or sincere than those
which had been addressed to himself: when he was suddenly disturbed by
hearing a bustle and violent clattering of horses in the street, and at
the same time the voices of some of his own servants. This increasing,
he rang the bell to inquire the cause, and no one answering, he at
length opened the door of an apartment and called to the porter,
asking what was the matter? He was answered, that a carriage had been
overturned opposite his door, and it was wished to bring the lady who
had suffered from the accident into his Lordship's house.

"By all means, immediately," Lord Albert exclaimed; "afford every
assistance possible;" and in a few instants a lady was borne in by two
domestics. She was immediately placed, apparently insensible, on a
couch in an adjoining apartment. The female attendants were summoned
to her aid, and Lord Albert himself supported her head on his breast:
"Good heavens!" he exclaimed, "it is Lady Hamlet Vernon! Send off
directly for Doctor Meynell." A stream of blood flowed over her face,
and in order to ascertain where she was wounded it was necessary to let
down her hair, which fell in glossy masses over her neck and shoulders.
The glass of the carriage window, against which Lady Hamlet Vernon had
fallen, was the cause of the catastrophe; and though the injury was
not found to be dangerous, the wound had been sufficiently severe to
occasion a suffusion of blood. The physician soon arrived, and having
examined the extent of the evil, applied remedies and administered
restoratives to the terrified Lady Hamlet Vernon, who was shortly after
restored to her senses, and enabled to explain the cause of her having
met with so dangerous an accident.

"She was returning," she said, "from Sir William Temple's
dinner-party, when her coachman, whom she supposed was intoxicated,
drove furiously, and the carriage coming in contact with the
curb-stone at the corner of the street, overturned, was dashed with
violence against the pavement, and broken to pieces." This account
was corroborated by her footmen, who had miraculously escaped unhurt.
Lady Hamlet then expressed her thanks at having received such prompt
and kind assistance, and Doctor Meynell having pronounced it as his
opinion, that if she remained quiet for a few days, she would find no
disagreeable effects result from the accident, and that she might with
safety be removed to her own house, Lord Albert's carriage was ordered
to convey her thither. "I am happy, indeed, to think it is thus," said
Lord Albert; "and that I have been of the least use is most gratifying
to me."

This adventure, related in a few words, occupied an hour or more in
its actual occurrence; and Lord Albert had had leisure to remark the
symmetry of form and feature for which Lady Hamlet Vernon had been so
long celebrated. He might have beheld Lady Hamlet for ever, rouged and
dressed in public, and have passed her by unnoticed; but when he beheld
her pale, dishevelled, in pain, and dependent on him at the moment for
relief, he thought her exquisitely fair, and there entered a degree of
romantic illusion in this accident which roused his fancy, while her
sufferings touched the friendly feelings of his nature.

As he assisted her to her carriage, they passed through the room
where he had been sitting previous to her arrival; the candles were
still burning, and his papers lay in confusion around, the writing-box
was open, in the lid of which was the portrait of Lady Adeline. Lady
Hamlet Vernon pausing, complained of a momentary feeling of faintness,
and threw herself on a chair close to the writing-table; her eyes in
an instant were rivetted on the picture, and at the same moment Lord
Albert's hand closed it from her view. There was nothing that demanded
secrecy in his possessing Lady Adeline's picture. His engagement to his
cousin was generally known, and his having her portrait, therefore,
was no offence against propriety; but every body who has loved will
understand the feeling, that the sacredness of their heart's affections
is broken in upon, if an indifferent or casual eye rest upon a treasure
of the kind. Lady Hamlet Vernon spoke not, but her looks testified what
they had seen; while he remained confused, and seemed glad when she
proposed moving again to the carriage.

"I am afraid," she said, her voice trembling as she spoke, "I am
afraid my accident has been the occasion of breaking in upon your
retirement, and disturbing you out of a most delightful reverie. I
shall regret this the more if it makes you hate me altogether--but the
fault was not mine."

"Hate you! Lady Hamlet Vernon--hatred and Lady Hamlet Vernon are two
words that cannot by any accident be connected together."

"Ah! would that your words were as true as they are courteous," she
replied mournfully; "but courtesies, alas! _imply_ an interest that
they do not mean. Do not, however, let me detain you, Lord Albert; it
rains"-- As he still lingered at the door of the carriage, which they
had reached, and in which she now entered, he added, "You will at least
give me leave to enquire for you to-morrow?" which was all he had time
to say, as the carriage was driven rapidly away.

Lord Albert returned to his room, with a confusion of images chasing
each other in such quick succession through his mind, that though he
resumed his pen to finish his letter to Lady Adeline, he found it
difficult to do so; and he was conscious that the few words which he
added were in such a different tone, and so little in keeping with the
previous part, that he finished abruptly, and, folding and sealing
his letter, closed the box that contained the miniature, and throwing
himself back in his chair, mused in vacancy of thought till slumber was
overpowering him. Without once adverting to Lady Adeline's book, he
hastened to lose in sleep the feeling of dissatisfaction which had so
suddenly possessed him.

On the following morning, when Lady Hamlet Vernon arose, feeling
little of the accident of the preceding evening, and having taken
particular pains with her toilette, she cast a glance of complacency
at her reflected image in the mirror, and, descending to her boudoir,
placed herself on a sofa, spread with embroidered cushions, folded a
velvet _couvre-pied_ over her feet, ordered a table stored with books
to be placed within her reach, on which also rested a guitar and a
vase of flowers, and gave way to a train of reflections and feelings
unaccountably called up by the occurrences of the previous evening.
Lady Hamlet Vernon was a person who had read, and did read, at _times_;
but in the present instance, when calling for her books, she intended
no farther use of them beyond casual allusion to their contents, and
what their appearance might avail to give an interest in regard to
herself.

She lay with her arm resting on a pillow, and her ears attentively
listening to every cabriolet that passed, eagerly anticipating a visit
from Lord Albert. She twice looked at her watch; once she struck it, to
know if its sound answered to the hour its hand designated.--"Surely,"
she said, with some impatience, "he must at least inquire for me?--and
it is late--late for a person of Lord Albert's early habit--it is
really three o'clock." At that moment a short decided knock at the
door roused her attention. Her hand was on the bell in an instant,
lest the servants might deny her--but in another the door opened, and
_not_ Lord Albert, but the pale and melancholy Frank Ombre entered. The
revulsion from pleasure to disappointment occasioned by the appearance
of this visitor, and which displayed itself in Lady Hamlet Vernon's
features, was ingeniously ascribed by her to a sudden pain in her head,
the consequence, she said, of her accident the preceding night; which
accident she hastened to detail, and was gratified by the homage of
regrets, most poetically expressed by Mr. Ombre, who remarked that the
danger of this occurrence was transferred from herself to her admirers.

"The beautiful languor which it has cast over your person has produced
a varied charm more inimical to our peace than even the lightning of
your eyes. What a fortunate man that Lord Albert was, to be on the
very spot to render you assistance! There are some persons, as we all
know, who are born felicitous--they please without caring to please;
they render services without thinking what they are doing, or even
being interested in reality about the persons whom they serve; they
are reckoned handsome without one regularly beautiful feature, and
pronounced clever, superior, talented, without ever doing any thing to
prove it. But in that, perhaps, lies their wisdom--one may be _every
thing_ so long as one never proves one's-self _nothing_."

"True, there are such people in the world, I believe; but do you really
mean to say"--(and she almost blushed.)

"I never mean, or can mean, to say any thing that is disagreeable to
you"....

"Oh, it is not I who am interested in what he _is_, or is _not_; but,
to confess the truth, a very dear friend of mine, a charming young
person, takes an interest in him, and I should like to know if he is
worthy of that interest before her affections are further engaged."

"Ah! my dear Lady Hamlet Vernon," replied Mr. Ombre, "there is nobody
like you--I always said so. You know _I never flatter_; but you are so
disinterested, always thinking about other people, always so kindly
busy where you can be of any use; so unlike the world in general, in
short, that it quite spoils one for living in it."

"Well, this is a point we shall not dispute about, my dear Mr. Ombre,
only tell me what you know of Lord Albert D'Esterre? what are his
tastes, his habits, his pursuits, his politics?"

"Of himself I can tell you little; with his father I was very intimate
long ago, and I believe, somehow or other, people do always contrive
to be like either father or mother, some time or another in their
life. Of the father I could tell you, that there did not exist a more
polished or high-bred man, a term which you know is not always justly
applicable to persons of high rank; one very well versed in literature
too, at least for the peerage in that day, and so long as he continued
in public life, no one acted more to the general satisfaction of people
than my Lord Tresyllian. Of the mother there is little to say, except
that she was--nay is, for aught I know to the contrary--a very good
sort of person; who was never known to make any noise, save once, in
her life, and that certainly was not on a judicious occasion, for
it was when the famous Bellina, the dancer, was _attachée_ to the
suite of her husband during his embassy at ----. Then indeed Lady
Tresyllian did make some very unadvised stir, and contrived that the
whole court should remark upon the subject; but her husband, who was
the most polite man in the world, as I have said before, represented
to her the inutility of such conduct, pointed out how such a lady,
and such a one, conducted herself in similar situations; stated that
these sort of things always happened, and were only unpleasant when
they were injudiciously managed, and in short the affair was amicably
adjusted; an affair which happened so long ago, that it is only some
old chroniclers like myself who have any recollection of it.

"After Lord Tresyllian's return to England, he continued to fill
several official situations as long as his friends, or his party
rather, as those are called who contrive to hang together for some
interest,--their own or their country's, it matters not--continued in
office--and on their retiring, his Lordship retired also: I suppose to
preserve his consistency, or because his talents were not needed in
the new arrangement. Since then, gout and disappointed ambition have
contributed to make him a recluse from the busy world of fashion; and
in the magnificence of his princely fortune, and in the society of
a chosen few, who have shared his fate, or depended on his interest
in their political career, his existence is now passed, settling the
balance of Europe in his closet, opposing his Majesty's ministers (as
long as they shall not include his own party) in the senate, and on
every other occasion, and haranguing every assembly of disappointed
patriots in his own county, of which he is lord lieutenant.

"Of Lord Tresyllian's patriotism I presume none doubt--of his judgment
and good taste in politics, from the last-mentioned fact, while holding
his present situation, perhaps there may be some question. But he has
considerable parliamentary interest, and will therefore always have
some who will think all he says or does right. His eldest son Osberton
we all know follows in his father's line of opposition; glad, I dare
say, to be saved the trouble of acting or thinking for himself. I need
not tell you more of him--in short, there is nothing to tell, but his
party. What Lord Albert D'Esterre's will be, remains to be proved;
I mean in the only way people think a man's being any thing is of
consequence, namely the part he will take in public life. He inherits
wealth from Lady Tresyllian, and so far will be independent of his
father; but he is too young, I should think, to escape the toils that
will be laid for a young member, and therefore we shall soon see him
engaged on one side or the other, as a tool of party. By the bye, what
says Lady Tilney of him for that?" Here another knock announced another
arrival, and Mr. Ombre rose to depart.

"Pray, my dear Mr. Ombre, do not run away; I should be so delighted if
you would stay and help to keep the conversation alive, I am too weak
to do any thing but listen. Indeed my poor head tells me that I ought
not to do that."

"I would not stay a moment longer on any account--not for the world,"
was Mr. Ombre's reply, gently pressing her extended hand; "I am sure I
have talked too much already. Lord Albert D'Esterre," (for it was he
who entered), "I request you will not be so agreeable as you usually
are, for our fair friend feels the effect of her accident last night;
and I am sure she ought not to be amused, unless being put to sleep
be called amusement. If I were her nurse I would prescribe a quieting
draught and bed, as to a tired child; and so I take my leave and give
my advice without any fee: it is always the cheapest thing in the world
you know;" and he went away at the very proper moment, having left
behind him the character of being the most agreeable man in the world.

"I should have come sooner," said Lord Albert, "to inquire for you,
Lady Hamlet Vernon, but I was afraid of being too early; and I really
put a restraint on my wishes in not being at your door much sooner;
for I was very anxious to know you had not suffered from the shock you
received last night."

"I have suffered, certainly," she replied, blushing, "but not to
any alarming degree; a day or two of confinement to my sofa, and Dr.
Meynell assures me I shall be quite able to go about again as usual. In
the mean time, here are my friends," pointing to the books, "who are
ever at hand to entertain me."

"And surely," Lord D'Esterre replied, "there are a thousand living
friends also, alike ready to endeavour to make the hours pass sweetly;
nevertheless, I honour those who can be independent of society for
entertainment."

Lady Hamlet Vernon saw she had guessed rightly, and went on to say,
sighing as she spoke, "The fact is, that London crowds are not society,
that the whole routine of a town life unsatisfactory; and that every
circumstance, depending upon a mere pursuit of dissipation, is in
itself necessarily an alienation, for the time at least in which we
are engaged in it, from all our higher and better enjoyments; but then
when one has lost all on whom one depended for comfort, and support,
and advice; when one is left alone, a heart-broken thing upon the wide
world, misjudged by some, condemned by many, flattered it may be by a
few, there is such a stormy ocean, such a desert waste outspread to
view, that the heart seeks refuge from the alternative in a multitude
of minor trifles, which leave no leisure to feel, still less to
reflect; and hurrying on from hour to hour, one passes life away as
chance directs."

Lady Hamlet Vernon did not know to whom she was speaking, or she would
have spoken in a very different tone. She had heard of refinement and
morality, she could even admire both; but to religious principle she
was a stranger. She paused after having uttered the last words, and,
looking in Lord Albert's countenance as she waited for a reply, read
there a varying expression, the meaning of which she was at a loss to
interpret. At last he spoke, and said with deep earnestness, which
failed not to attract her attention, although she was not prepared to
understand the import of his words:

"Is it possible! then I grieve for you indeed." As he uttered this
brief sentence he took up a book, unconscious of what he was doing; and
opening the title-page, read "Tremaine." Lady Hamlet Vernon had had
recourse to her salts, to her handkerchief; and then, as if repressing
her starting tears, she asked, "What do you think of Tremaine?--is it
not charming?--Do you know I have thought the hero was like you."

"I hope not; I would not be like that man on any account whatever."

"No!--and why?"

"Why, because I think false refinement the most wretched of human
possessions; and all refinement is false which converts enjoyment to
pain; nay, I deny that it is refinement; it is only the sophistry of a
diseased mind, the excrescence of a beautiful plant; however, the work
is a work of power, and its intention pure, though I do not think it
free from danger. But tell me, Lady Hamlet Vernon--that is, will you
give me leave to ask you a question?"

"Certainly."

"Did you ever read the third volume of Tremaine attentively through?"
She blushed a genuine blush as she replied: "_Not quite_: I am
afraid--I thought it heavy."

"You do not surprise me; the mind must come tutored to the page to
enjoy it as it ought to be enjoyed; and perhaps the fault which might
be found is precisely this, that those who would be most likely to read
it, are those who would be least likely to benefit by its perusal."

"You certainly converse, Lord Albert," said Lady Hamlet Vernon, "very
differently from any person I ever conversed with; your ideas are quite
extraordinary to me, quite new, and you have made me lose myself in a
world of thought; you make me feel that every thing I have hitherto
thought was all mistake; but you must allow me to say, that, though
willing to become your pupil, I must be somewhat instructed in this
novel language before I feel myself competent to reply."

"What I said seems to me very simple; I am not conscious of having
expressed any abstruse or recondite thoughts: at all events, I
certainly did not mean to be affected, still less impertinent--it was
something you said, which startled me, and made me feel concern, and it
might seem to you, that I evinced it with too much freedom--if I have
erred, pardon me."

"Pardon, my dear Lord! there is no question about pardoning; but I am
curious to know what made you look so very grave when I said I wished
to forget my existence, and lose all sense of what had befallen me, or
what might befall me, in the busy idleness of life--do you attach any
very dreadful idea to this declaration?"

"A very dreadful one indeed," was his reply.

"Well, then, I do begin to believe that what I heard of you was
true--you are one of the saints--I mean, one of the set of people who
go about preaching and praying all day long. But then you frequent
balls and assemblies, and are so charming, I cannot reconcile this idea
with your air, appearance, and demeanour, or with the character of
those sour, misanthropic beings: do explain to me this mystery."

"I wish I were one of those whom you so designate," said Lord Albert
D'Esterre gravely,--"but indeed I am far from being so. All I can say
to explain my meaning briefly is, that I have received a Christian and
religious education, and consequently that I think to live by chance,
and to let accident sway our actions, is a perilous state of delusion."

"What do you mean to say, Lord Albert, that you regulate all your
thoughts, words, and actions, by some strictly self-drawn line of rule?"

"Oh, Lady Hamlet Vernon, you probe my conscience, and I am thankful to
you: no, indeed, I have never yet been enabled so to do--but I wish I
could--not indeed by any self-drawn line or rule, but that by which all
ought to guide themselves."

"Well, at last I have met with one extraordinary person, and this our
conversation must be resumed; but here comes some unwelcome visitor,
and for the moment the subject must drop."

The conversation was interrupted by the announcement of Mr. Temple
Vernon. He has been already noticed as the object of Lady Tilney's
particular dislike from his independent, and, as she termed it, rude
freedom of character, and he must have been unpopular in a coterie
where studied deportment and total absence of all nature formed a
requisite merit for admission. But he was nearly allied by marriage to
Lady Hamlet Vernon, having inherited that portion of her late husband,
Lord Hamlet Vernon's property, which was not bequeathed to herself.
He was first cousin of the late Lord also, and Lady Hamlet Vernon's
jointure being paid from estates that devolved to him, she had been
condemned to keep up an intercourse which, under existing circumstances
of his _mauvaise odeur_, in her particular circle, she would gladly
have dispensed with. She however endeavoured to maintain that kind
of friendly intercourse with him, which would prevent any thing like
collision in matters where her own interest was concerned, and with
this view preferred exposing herself to harsh remarks from Lady Tilney
and others of the society, as to his admission into her house. "Ah, Mr.
Vernon, is it you," said Lady Hamlet Vernon to him as he entered; "I
hope I see you well?"

"Allow me rather to inquire, Lady Hamlet Vernon, about yourself;
I have made a _détour_ of at least two miles to satisfy my anxiety
concerning you all. London is ringing with the terrible accident which
befel you last night. Pray tell me all the particulars, and tell me too
who was the fortunate knight-errant that rendered you assistance?" Lady
Hamlet made an inclination of her head towards Lord Albert D'Esterre.

"Ah! is it so? well, he looks as if he were made for adventures,"
directing his glance towards Lord Albert. "Now, though I, poor devil
that I am, desire no happier chance, I may drive about all day or night
and no such good fortune ever betide me as delivering a lady from a
perilous accident--really, Lord Albert, I congratulate you." Lord
Albert bowed, as he replied,

"I am exceedingly happy that my servants were of any use; but indeed I
had not the good fortune you ascribe to me: for I was sitting occupied
in my library, and wholly unconscious of what passed in the street,
till Lady Hamlet Vernon was brought into the house."

"Indeed, is it so? well, I have heard it said through the whole town,
that Lady Hamlet Vernon's horses ran away, that the coachman was dashed
from his box, and that some _preux chevalier_ had seized the horses
in their course, and though nearly annihilated himself, had succeeded
in his desperate efforts to stop them; whereas I am happy to see my
Lord is safe and sound. Lady Hamlet, I rejoice to find very little the
worse, and the long paragraph in the Morning Post all a lie. Well,
there is only one thing to be done under these circumstances, which is
to set the story right by a counter-statement, and therefore pray do
tell me all the particulars."

Lady Hamlet Vernon smiled, with constrained complacency, saying, "you
may tell the fact, Mr. Vernon, if you chuse to take the trouble, which
is simply this;--that on returning home my coachman was drunk, and
upset my carriage; and the accident happened close to Lord Albert
D'Esterre's door, so that I was borne into his house, and received
there every kind attention."

"But," enquired Mr. Temple Vernon, who had listened with evident
eagerness to the recital, "where were you going?--whence were you
coming?--for all these particulars are of importance."

"Oh! home."

"Good heavens, home! and at the early hour of twelve?"

"Yes."

"But where were you coming from?"

"Oh! we had been dining at Sir William Temple's."

"Ah, and is that really so? was all that Temple said at the clubs
yesterday morning really true? Did you, and the Tilney, and the
Leinsengen, and I don't know who else, dine with him? Well, that is
really too good--why no room in London will hold Temple after this. He
was always insufferable, even before he was promoted in the world; and
now that affairs have taken this favourable turn, heaven knows what he
will become; why he'll burst like the frog in the fable. But I am very
sorry, for his dinners were good dinners in their way; now, however,
they will be intolerable, for they will consist in every course of
_réchauffés_ of what Lady Tilney admired, or did, or said--do tell me
how the affair went off."

"Indeed, Mr. Temple Vernon, I cannot talk more to-day; rather I pray
you tell me some news--how did the D'Hermanton's party end?"

"Well then, if you so command it, let us turn to my note
book"--affecting to read, as he counted over his fingers, "Lady Tilney
was _not_ at the Duchess of D'Hermanton's; Lady Ellersby _was_, but
only walked through the apartments; Lady Boileau went no further
than the first room; item, Mr. Pierpoint did not either; neither did
Comtesse Leinsengen, who sat all the evening by Lord Baskerville, but
spoke little; the Duke of Mercington only shewed his waistcoat, and
then departed: all of which I hold to be signs that portend dark doings
in the court of Denmark. Now this I think is a correct _résume_ of the
Hermanton 'at home.' As to the politics of the last evening, it is
confidently stated that the Duke of ---- has some famous bird-lime,
called expediency, which will catch a vast number of young birds,"
turning at the same time to Lord Albert, "is it not so, my Lord?"

"Mr. Temple Vernon seems so perfectly master of every body's
intentions and affairs, that I scarcely know, in his presence, whether
or not I am master of my own."

"The fact is, my good Lord, that nobody knows what they are going to do
(if they will only confess the truth) for two minutes together."

"In one sense that is true enough, Mr. Temple Vernon, for we intend
many things which we never do, and _vice versâ_; nevertheless our will
is free, and fortunately not always under the direction of others to
guide it for us."

"Oh! this is becoming too deep for me," interrupted Lady Hamlet Vernon.

"And for me too," replied Mr. Temple Vernon, "as I have a thousand
things to do before seven, and it is now past four o'clock; however
I leave Lady Hamlet Vernon with less regret, knowing she has so
entertaining a companion as Lord D'Esterre." This was said very
ironically, and as the latter quickly perceived all the monkey malice
of the man, he disarmed it of its sting by rising to depart, saying:

"Lady Hamlet Vernon has far more entertaining companions lying on her
table, than are generally to be met with among London idlers; and not
to prove myself one of these, I must make my bow without further delay,
trusting soon to have the pleasure of seeing her once more, in the gay
scenes in which she is so fair an ornament;" and again bowing to Mr.
Temple Vernon, he departed before the latter could leave the room.

"Well, my dear Lady, you owe me something, I am sure, for having rid
you from the presence of that formal personage." Lady Hamlet Vernon did
not look as if she agreed with him, but forced a smile as she replied:

"I like variety in character and manners; the world would grow dull, if
every one were cut out on the same pattern."

"I am glad to hear you say that, my dear Lady Hamlet Vernon, for that
is exactly what I think; and, therefore, I have always held off from
the tyranny, which goes to make every body subscribe to the same code
in manners, dress, hours, nay even language; and at least, my coat, my
neckcloth, my hair, is all after a cut of my own, and I find all does
vastly well; for if the world does not approve the one or like the
other, they are at least afraid of me, because I think for myself. This
answers my purpose precisely as well. But you look serious, I see, and
therefore I will follow my Lord Albert D'Esterre's inimitable example,
and leaving my last sentence in the tablets of your memory, farewell,
most fair and fascinating lady. One word more I beg to add, remember
that I wish exceedingly to go to Lady Tilney's next Friday, and I leave
my wish in the hands of the kindest and fairest of the daughters of
Eve. I _depend_ upon your managing it for me."

"Oh! certainly, nothing is easier you know, you are always _le bien
venu_, I wonder that you can make this request a favour."

"Ah! all that is very well from your lips, but you know, although
I am the most admired man about town, I am sometimes by some chance
forgotten. It is very odd that it should be so, but nevertheless it is
often unjustly the case; and I correct fortune by such applications as
the one I have just made to you; and now _je vous baise les mains_ in
the D'Esterre phraseology, though I would much rather do so in reality,
and so farewell most fair."

"Depend upon me," replied Lady Hamlet Vernon, kissing her hand to him
as he left the room. "Depend upon my hating you most cordially," she
said to herself; as her head sank on the pillow of her sofa, and she
tried to shut out from her recollection all his ill-timed _bavardage_,
and to recal the strange but eloquent converse of the interesting Lord
D'Esterre.




CHAPTER IX.

THE PRIMA SERA; LETTERS, SNARES.


Lady Hamlet Vernon, in consequence of her recent accident, received
society at home instead of seeking it abroad; and for several evenings
the _élite_ of _ton_, passed their _prima sera_ at her house. Lord
Albert D'Esterre was constant too in his attendance there, and was
evidently much occupied with Lady Hamlet Vernon. His attentions did not
escape remark, and though Lady Tilney's object, in wishing to possess
an influence over Lord Albert, was quite of another nature, still
she felt some disappointment at finding he was interested in another
quarter, and therefore less likely to yield to the designs which she
had formed upon his political independence.

"I'll tell you how that matter stands," replied Lord Rainham, as she
inquired his opinion on the subject, "the _love_ is at present entirely
on the lady's side; Lord Albert is not at all captive, and he has such
obsolete ways of thinking, that I imagine he will not be easily caught.
I should recommend his being given up altogether, he will never play a
part among us, depend upon that; and you will not find him worth the
trouble of educating."

"Oh! as to playing a part, my dear Lord, one does not want every body
to play a part, at least not a _first_ part you know; and as for
_educating_ them, that is quite out of the question."

"But," rejoined Lord Rainham, "you forget there is such a thing as
persuasion; and it is said D'Esterre took his seat on the side of
ministers by some means of that sort. Now it is possible, that although
no _liaison de cœur_ exists between him and Lady Hamlet Vernon, yet as
a clever woman, she may have decided his vacillating judgment; to say
the truth, I believe she has." Lady Tilney bit her lip, and something
like the word provoking, escaped her, as she replied, "I would scorn
to persuade any body to any thing against his will; there is nothing
I have ever maintained more strenuously, than that every individual
should have a free choice in all the different elections of life."
Lord Rainham smiled. "But after all," she added with an affected
indifference, by which she attempted ineffectually to conceal her
mortification, "it is of very little importance which side Lord Albert
has taken."

"One would have thought so indeed but for the disappointment which is
evident since he has declared himself," replied Lord Rainham, drily.

However much Lady Tilney felt chagrined at the thought that another had
succeeded in turning Lord Albert's mind in a direction contrary to her
wishes, yet she was too politic to betray her disappointment to the
person who had triumphed; and therefore, on the evening in question,
she paid more than usual attention to Lady Hamlet Vernon.

"Dear Lady Hamlet Vernon," said Lady Tilney addressing her, as she
took a seat by her, "you must not pretend to be ill any longer, we
positively cannot do without you;" and then turning to Comtesse
Leinsengen, she added, "did you ever see any thing to equal the beauty
of her fairy foot?"

This was a sore subject, as the reverse of the proposition always
suggested itself to the Comtesse's fancy, in respect of her own; and
she pretended on the present occasion not to hear it, but tossing up
her head, took Lady Baskerville's arm, who was sitting on the other
side of her, and whispered in her ear, "Lady Tilney does take such
_engouements_, and then is as quickly tired of them, _des feus de
pailles_," shrugging her shoulders contemptuously; "but I wonder she
_like_ to dat old story of her admiration for feet, when she made
herself so very ridiculous in her affected praises of dat _soi-disant_
princesse. De lady who professes to worship liberty, independence,
and all dat sort of ting, to sit holding anoder woman's foot upon her
knee, and making all dat sort of fuss, for my part, _je n'ai jamais pu
conçevoir ce plaisir là_."

"It does seem to me rather extraordinary," replied Lady Baskerville;
"but then Lady Tilney is so very good-humoured, she always protects
every body she thinks put down or in distress." This was a prudent
answer on Lady Baskerville's part, but not well received, which on
perceiving, she quickly added:

"As to myself, I confess I do not take any pleasure in those sort of
out-of-the-way admirations; I can admire beauty in other women; but I
cannot affect to be so exceedingly enchanted by it as to turn _fille de
chambre_ in its honour. But there are many things in the world vastly
ridiculous; for instance, can any thing be more so in its way than
that Duke and Duchess D'Hermanton, who have been married I don't know
how long, and are still _aux premiers amours_; one sees them eternally
dawdling about together, as if persons came into company to be always
setting a pattern of conjugal felicity. It is pardonable, perhaps,
for very young people, during a few months to fancy themselves vastly
in love; but after that time it is sickening--don't you think so,
Comtesse?"

"Oui, vraiment; _au reste_ it is only in dis country that people do
give themselves such _ridicule_, and to say truth, not often, even
here."

"But pardon me, Comtesse," said Lady Baskerville, withdrawing from her;
"I must go away, for I see Lord Boileau waiting for me, whom I had
promised to take to Almack's, and had nearly forgotten;" so saying she
passed into an adjoining room, and addressing him said:

"Lord Boileau we are very late, and if we do not make haste we shall be
shut out."

"Oh, no--all _that_ is left out of the evening's entertainment, I can
assure you, for they begin to be afraid that nobody will go in, though
the doors are left wide open all night."

"I am not surprised, for I hate the whole thing, and think it is become
quite detestable, only I promised Lady Aveling to go to-night, so if
you are ready let us begone;--but I have not made my curtsey to Lady
Hamlet."

"Indeed, Lady Baskerville, you may spare yourself that trouble, if you
mean to be agreeable, for do you not see she is enamoured _pardessus
les yeux_ with _that_ Lord Albert D'Esterre."

"Ah," rejoined Lady Baskerville, looking in the direction where they
sat, "is it so? Well, every one has her taste; but I cannot say such a
person would ever touch my heart."

"Oh! _your_ heart we all know is assailable but _by one_, and that
Baskerville is the man, the most to be envied in all the world; to be
sure there never was _such_ a wife as you are, quite perfect, Lady
Baskerville, only too perfect." Lady Baskerville cast back her head,
and looking at Lord Boileau with one of her _intelligent_ smiles, they
passed on, and stepping into the carriage, drove off to finish their
evening amusements in the insipid glitter of an Almack's ball.

After the lapse of some weeks Lady Hamlet Vernon was completely
restored to health and beauty, and again resumed her usual routine of
existence. She sought dissipation at all times eagerly, from habit;
but now there was added to this impulse a restlessness of feeling, an
anxiety if alone, and a void in her heart, from the evening in which
her accident happened, such as she had never before experienced. It
was in vain for her to conceal from herself, that she had perhaps
_hitherto_ unconsciously courted the society of Lord Albert D'Esterre
more than of any other person, without considering how far she was
yielding to the gratification consistently with any probable chance
of happiness to herself in the ultimate issue. She certainly had a
decided preference for Lord Albert D'Esterre, or why did she seek
every opportunity of seeing him; or why feel uneasy when she heard of
his acknowledged affiance to another? These feelings prompted her to
know more of the appearance and character of his intended bride, whom
circumstances had as yet prevented from appearing in the great world of
London, and to whom she was an utter stranger.

Under this influence, she determined to address a letter to one with
whom she was in the habit of corresponding, and whom she knew to be on
a visit to Dunmelraise, the seat of Lady Adeline's mother. She felt
confident that she might take this step without compromising herself,
and without her inquiries being deemed strange, or indicative of any
thing beyond a natural curiosity. Shortly after this letter had been
written, the following reply came from her friend, Mr. G. Foley; the
contents of which were not at all calculated to tranquillize Lady
Hamlet Vernon's feelings, if she really had any affection for Lord
Albert.

 _Letter from Mr. Foley to Lady Hamlet Vernon._

 "When one is not to write of that which one is thinking about,
 it is the most difficult thing in the world to write at all. But
 you command, and I must endeavour to obey. Let me see how am I to
 commence? Perhaps it is best that I do so by giving you _the history_,
 as one young lady writing to another would say, of the Lady Adeline
 Seymour. You know that Lady Dunmelraise, her mother, lost her husband
 and an only son soon after Lady Adeline's birth; she then fell into
 low spirits and bad health, but by degrees roused herself to live for
 this child; and I must do her the justice to say, she has fulfilled
 her task admirably.

 "As to personal appearance, Lady Adeline Seymour is of that height
 which just escapes being too tall; of that slimness which just escapes
 being too thin; of that untutored manner which is often nearly being
 _gauche_, were it not that it is accompanied by a childish grace which
 evades the charge. Quick of perception, and quicker still in feeling,
 she has a peculiar way of checking these impulses so as never to
 allow them to betray her into any unbecoming harshness or abruptness
 of manner; the very fear one entertains that she may overstep the
 boundary of polished _rétenu_ gives an additional zest to her, but
 _gare a ceux qui voudroit l'imiter_--for she is perfectly original and
 defies all copyists. As to her face it is not marvellously beautiful,
 still less regularly so, but it is of such love-like paleness, chased
 by such sunny gleams of joyous youth continually playing over her
 features, that one could not wish it changed even for a more regular
 beauty. She is the very model of the poet's dream when he wrote--

    ----'Her pure and eloquent blood
    Spoke in her cheeks, and so distinctly wrought,
    That one would almost say her body thought.'

 "Thus much for Lady Adeline's appearance and manners. In regard to
 the acquirements and endowments of her mental being, I am perhaps not
 myself qualified to speak--she is not precisely what the laborious
 educating mammas would call accomplished, but she has a master genius
 for _one_ art and a love for all. Her musical talent certainly
 requires much instruction to bring it to any perfection, but the
 scraps of airs she warbles as she flies about the house, are in the
 best taste as far as they go--and a few Venetian ballads which she
 sings to her guitar, and which she says her cousin taught her, are
 quite inebriating.

 "She unfeignedly undervalues all she does; perhaps too much so; but
 you read in her countenance that she is perfectly sincere; that all
 _spoken_ praise distresses her; and you are involuntarily led to seek
 to give her homage in some more palatable shape.

 "What do you think of this portrait of the young Adeline? It looks
 like that of a heroine in romance, as I glance my eyes over the
 words, and yet I have such a nausea at all the persons bearing that
 designation, that I would fain save the delightful one of whom I am
 writing from that hacknied name. You must have heard, of course, that
 she is engaged to her cousin Lord Albert D'Esterre; but like all those
 engagements made for people when they are children, I do not think
 it will be fulfilled _con amore_--not but what she blushes whenever
 she speaks of him, and _that_ she does pretty frequently; and if he
 is grown up like a certain bust (for I have not seen him these three
 years, and boys change so from eighteen to one and twenty), he really
 must be _un bel Giovane_. By the way, she has made an exquisite
 drawing of _mon beau cousin_, but that is neither here nor there,
 the fiction of seventeen is always beautiful. Pray in your next
 gracious letter inform me what sort of man he has become, for I feel a
 brotherly regard for this very nice person, Lady Adeline Seymour, and
 should like to think she had a chance of happiness. Happiness, what a
 sound! but the reality, where is it?

      'Come L'Araba Fenicè
    Che ci sia, ciascun lo dicè
    Dove sia, nessun lo sà.'

 "I should have told you, by the bye, that with all the gaiety,
 which is one of her greatest charms, Lady Adeline has a tincture of
 seriousness mingled with it, which some might suppose approached to
 Methodism; but even if it is so, _à son age elle en guérira_.

 "I have been a long time here: but it has been a great gratification
 to me, and time has glided softly by; for in addition to the charms
 of the daughter, Lady Dunmelraise is in all respects a very agreeable
 and sensible woman, has seen a great deal of the world, and besides
 all that, honours your humble servant with her very particular regard;
 which she tells me is bestowed entirely for the sake of my mother,
 the friend whom she loved most in the world next to her own family;
 but I am vain enough to flatter myself that she likes me a little for
 mine own sake too. And you, who understand every thing _à demi mot_,
 will know how soothing it is to a sick heart to receive kindness; this
 has induced me hitherto to linger on from day to day; but I shall
 vary the scene soon, for I begin to think that even I may be _de
 trop_; for I hear frequent mention made of Lord Albert D'Esterre's
 expected arrival; so to-morrow I set off for Luryddicath Park. Lord
 Tresyllian's; who, you know, is father to Lord Albert.

 "And now, my dear Lady Hamlet Vernon, having given you the particulars
 you required, I will not weary you with more of myself: but in pity to
 me, seeing that I am still for a time cut off from that only tolerable
 place in England, London, do write me a brief, gracious missive, that
 I may feast upon it till I am once more restored to your presence, and
 in the mean while believe me to be the most devoted of your slaves.
 Can I say more?

     "G. FOLEY."

Lady Hamlet Vernon, after perusing this letter, fell into a deep train
of reflection, if such can be called intense feeling usurping the mind,
to the exclusion of every other idea. The image of Lady Adeline, thus
vividly pourtrayed by Mr. Foley's pen, stood in actual presence before
her; and combined with that image, rose the vision of Lord Albert
D'Esterre. The happiness which would be the growth of an union between
two such persons as her knowledge of the one, and her fancied knowledge
of the other, represented them, was embodied with forcible reality, and
tears coursed each other involuntarily down her cheeks as she sat, more
like a marble image than a living being.

From this state she was suddenly roused by the servants announcing
Lord Albert D'Esterre himself; and making an effort to subdue the
feeling which either she was too much ashamed, or too proud to own,
she endeavoured to receive him with as much composure as she could
assume. After the first words of course had passed, Lady Hamlet Vernon
was too deeply absorbed in one subject for her readily to turn to any
indifferent topic; and she at length addressed Lord Albert on the
subject of her solicitude, saying, "Do you know I have received a
letter this morning full of the praises of a person, in whom I believe
you are much interested; it is from a friend of mine now staying at
Dunmelraise, and who draws such a picture of the charms of Lady Adeline
Seymour, that I wonder, Lord Albert, to see you here--but you are going
to Dunmelraise, are you not, immediately?" Her tears almost flowed
afresh as she pronounced these words; and unconsciously she cast a
look of tender intreaty on Lord Albert. The latter had involuntarily
started, coloured, and hesitated to reply to this unexpected question;
at length he answered:

"No, not immediately; I am unable to leave town yet."

"You are not in love," Lady Hamlet Vernon exclaimed, "no, you are _not_
in love with Lady Adeline Seymour--I read your heart in the measured
calmness of your words; she is _not_ the mistress of your affections."

The sentence seemed to have escaped Lady Hamlet Vernon's lips without
the power of control, in a moment of excitement; and her eyes, which
had been fixed on Lord Albert, now as suddenly fell beneath his gaze as
he exclaimed with astonishment,

"What can you mean, what _do_ you mean, Lady Hamlet Vernon?" At that
moment Lady Tilney was announced, and a minute after Lord Gascoigne.
Conversation became general; but Lord Albert, evidently labouring under
some painful feeling, took no part in it. Still he seemed determined to
remain, to await the departure of the others, when Lady Tilney proposed
to Lady Hamlet Vernon to accompany her to the Park; and the latter,
fearing that she had compromised herself in the too open expression of
her feelings relative to Lord Albert and Lady Adeline Seymour, availed
herself of the opportunity to avoid any renewal of the theme. With a
heart ill at ease, she prepared to attend Lady Tilney to the dazzling
throng of Hyde Park; while Lord Albert, seeing it was vain to look for
any explanation of Lady Hamlet Vernon's extraordinary address to him
at the moment, reluctantly handed her to Lady Tilney's carriage; and,
trusting to some future opportunity to ask an explanation, he mounted
his horse and rode off; but not with a mind so tranquil or a heart so
buoyant as he had possessed a short time before.

In proposing to take Lady Hamlet Vernon to the Park, Lady Tilney's
real object was to withdraw her from Lord Albert, whose anxiety had
not escaped her observation, and whose political career she still had
hopes might not be positively decided; at any rate, if hope remained,
it was worth the trial; and should she have been correct in her idea
that Lord Albert had not committed himself irrevocably, no time was
to be lost; that very moment perhaps he waited only the voice of Lady
Hamlet's influence, to decide his wavering intentions. Lady Tilney's
part was therefore quickly taken; and as they proceeded to the Park,
she endeavoured to turn Lady Hamlet Vernon's mind from Lord Albert, if
he really occupied any share in it, by adverting to every topic of the
day; among other things she said:

"What do you think! Miss Melcomb's marriage with Lord Glenmore is at
length declared. I had long had my suspicions that it would be so; but
I cannot say I approve of the affair; and I am sure you will think
with me, Lord Glenmore is too great a card to be played by that little
miss, who has never left her mamma's wing; and has, of course, imbibed
all her prejudices. But although Lord Glenmore has allied himself with
this family, we must not wholly give him up; besides the Georgina
is pretty, and she may yet not prove quite such a simpleton as she
looks." Lady Tilney, however, in vain endeavoured to interest Lady
Hamlet Vernon in any subject she discussed; the former acquiesced in
every thing her companion said, in order to avoid the argument which
would have followed any dissent from her opinion. Lady Hamlet Vernon's
remarks, when she made any, were short, and little to the purpose; and
at length, wearied and ill at ease, she complained of a head-ache, and
besought Lady Tilney to set her down at home.

When the carriage-door closed, Lady Tilney flung herself back,
exclaiming as she drew up the glass, "How provokingly discreet, she did
not once commit herself!" and Lady Tilney drove once more back to the
Park, in the hope of seeing Lord Albert; and if possible, by courting
his attention, of counteracting any influence which might have been
exercised on his opinion by Lady Hamlet Vernon. She looked, however, in
vain for him in the crowd; and at length drove home, disappointed and
displeased at her want of success, and out of humour with every thing.




CHAPTER X.

FASHIONABLE FRIENDSHIP.


Lord Glenmore's marriage soon became the subject of general
conversation. The day of the nuptials was already named, and the
ceremony was to be in the most splendid style. In compliment to Lord
Glenmore, several of his acquaintance were invited. Amongst these was
Lady Tilney and Lady Tenderden; the Comtesse Leinsengen of course; and
Lady Ellersby, who on her mother's side was related to the family of
the Melcombs. The parties named expressed themselves annoyed at the
idea of forming part of what they called the _Melcomb mélange_; but a
secret wish to retain an influence with Lord Glenmore, whose marriage
it was intended should not, without a trial of Miss Melcomb's aptitude
for _ton_, banish him from their circle.

The whole affair, however, was _sotto sugezione_ in the opinion of
Lady Tilney and her friends. "The strangest thing of all is," exclaimed
the former, as she was conversing on the subject with Lady Tenderden
and the Comtesse Leinsengen, "that the marriage takes place in church."

"In church! _quelle idée, vraiment on mourra de froid_."

"And pray how must one be dressed?" inquired Lady Tenderden.

"Oh, _en costume de traineau_, I presume, since it is in von of your
cold church; but vat sinifies how von dresses for it?"

"If it rains I really must send my excuse," said Lady Tilney, who
wanted to be on a level at least with the Comtesse in impertinence.
"Have you seen the _trousseau_?" she added.

"Yes, I have," replied Lady Tenderden. Lady Tilney looked blank; she
could not bear that others should precede her even in the inspection
of a _trousseau_. Lady Tenderden, continued:--"Madame Duval brought
me every thing that was worth seeing; the laces are magnificent, and
the _corbeille de noces_, and every thing is in good taste. But here
is Lady Ellersby," exclaimed Lady Tenderden, glad to break off from a
subject which had been disagreeable to her, "I do not suppose _she_
will approve of the programme of this ceremony."

"My dear Lady Ellersby," the ladies all exclaimed, running up to her,
"why did you not exert your influence with Lady Melcomb to prevent this
_baroque_ fancy of being married in church; surely your relationship
would have authorized your good advice on the occasion." Lady Ellersby
looked surprised, and asked an explanation.

"Do you not know," answered Lady Tilney, "that the ceremony is to take
place in a church?"

"La! does it? What a strange fancy!" drawled Lady Ellersby; "but I
should never think of giving any advice to Lady Melcomb--I never do, to
any body."

"Dat Mademoiselle Melcomb, vid all her imbecile _niaiserie_, seems not
to have played her part amiss."

"I think she will turn out better than one could have supposed,"
rejoined Lady Tenderden, "when she becomes _un peu plus façonné_."

"Do tell me who are the invited?" interrupted Lady Tilney, addressing
Lady Ellersby.

"Oh, half London, to be sure; such a quantity of tiresome relations,
and so much property, and family dignity, there will be no end of all
the cousins--don't you know they are just the sort of people who teem
with relations?"

"But who is there of the party that one knows?" replied Lady Tilney.

"Oh, there are ourselves, and the Duke of Mercington, and the Boileaus,
and Baskervilles, I believe; I fancy too the Duke and Duchess
D'Hermanton, and some of _that_ set, are also among the _priés_, but
I must go now _en qualité de cousine_, and leave my card with the
Melcombs, and then I shall go on to Kitchener's, who has the resetting
of the family diamonds. I am told they are magnificent; and I should
so like to persuade Lord Ellersby to let mine be reset too, I have had
them three years in their present form, and am so tired of them as
they are--he, he, he!--well--adieu, we shall meet to-night at Lady De
Chere's?"

"_Avouez moi qu'elle passe la permission qu'ou a d'être bête_,"
observed Lady Tenderden, as she left the room.

"May be so, but she is a very old friend of mine, and besides, she is
perfectly _comme il faut_, and after all, that sort of thing gets on in
the world just as well as talent."

"Perhaps better," rejoined Lady Tilney.

"_Précisement_," said the Comtesse Leinsengen, "but, _il faut que je
pars, je vais voir le trousseau_, for oderwise I shall have nothing to
say to Lady Baskerville, who goes vid me to-night to de Opera. _Adieu
les belles, adieu._"

"I wonder how she can be at the trouble of going to see that foolish
_trousseau_," exclaimed Lady Tilney, as soon as she was out of hearing.
"She is so _inconséquente_. Did Lady Ellersby name the Baskervilles as
being among the invited?" continued Lady Tilney.

"Oh yes, the Comtesse, depend upon it, has taken care they shall be
asked; and my Lord is always flattered in being reckoned a requisite
appendage to a woman of high rank; but he will soon find his error
in depending on her smiles, for except for the gratification of the
moment's vanity, she seeks no further aim, and at all times scruples
not to sacrifice her _çi-devant_ friends to her new ones."

"Poor Lord Baskerville," replied Lady Tilney, "was intended to be by
nature _le bon enfant_, which she calls him; but he has fallen into the
terrible mistake of thinking himself a _leader_ of _ton_, which gives
him a ridicule that he would not otherwise have."

"How well you read characters, my dear Lady Tilney! But I thought he
was a _protégé_ of yours."

"Oh, so he is; I like him of all things; and he is often vastly useful.
One must have different characters at command to fill different parts,
or else nothing that one wants would go on. But to return to the
Melcombs, I do not recover from my surprise about that marriage."

"It only shews what perseverance will do, I wished to talk the matter
over with you, and to ascertain whether or not you meant to attend;
so now I need not trouble you longer. Your gown you say is to be
rose-colour, mine shall be jonquille."

"Ah, you always look divine in that golden light: but what light do
you not look divine in?"

"I must positively run away, or you will quite turn my head with
flattery. Adieu, adieu," and they parted well pleased with each other.

When Lady Ellersby stopped at Lady Melcomb's door, where she had
intended only to leave her card, a multiplicity of people on the same
errand _faisoit queue à la porte_; but to her infinite dismay, just as
her carriage drove up, Lord Glenmore, who happened to be coming out of
the door, approached her with a countenance beaming happiness.

"I am sure Georgina will be at home to _you_; do allow me to hand you
out of your carriage."

"Not for the world, I would not intrude; I am sure Miss Melcomb has a
thousand things to do, and to arrange; but--"

"Nay, dear Lady Ellersby," continued Lord Glenmore, pressingly (who
thought every one must be as anxious to see his bride, as he was eager
she should be seen), "Georgina will be so disappointed if you do not
go up stairs, that I must entreat you will." And in short, for once,
what between curiosity to look at the bridal paraphernalia, and a sort
of awkwardness to do a decided thing, and say no, Lady Ellersby's
indolence was overcome, and she allowed herself to be handed up stairs
into the drawing room, where were assembled a host of ladies (_not_
Miss Melcomb), who were busily engaged admiring the various dresses and
finery which were displayed before them.

"You are just come in time, Lady Ellersby," exclaimed Lady Aveling,
"for after to-day, nobody is to be admitted."

"No? well, la! I am glad then; but my dear Lady Melcomb I came, I
assure you, expressly to wish you joy, and to leave my congratulations
also with Miss Melcomb, whom I hope, I am to see, for Lord Glenmore
insisted on my coming in, otherwise I would not have done so--knowing
how tiresome visitors are at such a moment; but since I am here, do me
the favour to mention to Miss Melcomb, how very happy I am to have the
opportunity of wishing her joy."

"And do look," cried Lady Aveling, "at this enchanting hat; it is just
come from Paris--was there ever any thing _de meilleur gôut_?--and
then look at this, and that _seduisante_--really, Lady Melcomb, your
selection has been exquisite. But here comes the bride."

Then ensued kisses, curtseys, and congratulations, during which Lord
Glenmore retired, wearied with the nonsense of the female coterie, and
despairing of even catching a glance from Miss Melcomb.

While the marriage ornaments continued to absorb the attention of the
other visitors, Miss Melcomb took Lady Ellersby aside to shew her what,
she said, was infinitely better worth looking at--a miniature of Lord
Glenmore.

"So, my dear," said Lady Ellersby, "you are really what they call in
love? he, he, he!"

"I am fondly attached to Lord Glenmore, and feel proud now in declaring
it;--it has become my happy duty," replied Miss Melcomb.

"Duty!" replied Lady Ellersby, opening her mouth, and _ouvrant des
grands yeux_, "he, he, he!--surely you are not serious? Whoever heard
a young person going to be married, that is, going to be her own
mistress, talk of duty! Tell me, really are you not delighted at the
idea of having horses and equipages, and doing exactly what you like,
and going out every where you please? That was what I liked and thought
of, when I was going to be married, and----but then I was not in
love--he, he, he!"

"No?" replied Miss Melcomb, somewhat astonished.

"Certainly not--he, he, he!"

"I have no wish," rejoined Miss Melcomb, "to be more my own mistress
than I am at present. I shall, on the contrary, feel myself less at
liberty, for of course a married woman has a thousand things to think
of which a girl has not."

"La, my dear, you talk in a way which it is very right to teach
children, but when people act for themselves they think very
differently. Every body, you know, marries to avoid being governed."

"I never could have married for that reason, for I have been the
happiest of creatures at home."

"Well really, la! you don't say so! But now you will have an opera
box, jewels, equipages, and all sorts of delightful things."

"I don't know--perhaps if Lord Glenmore intends I should--"

"La, how droll you are; you don't really mean to set out by asking his
leave, or consulting him on such trifling subjects as these, my dear
child, he, he, he! you are enough to spoil any husband.--Well, good
morning--you must correct yourself of such _enfantillage_--remember
what I say. Six months will not have elapsed before you recant all
this, and change your present mode of thinking and feeling."

Miss Melcomb smiled, and shook her head in token of dissent. "Good
morning," Lady Ellersby repeated, "I have already intruded too much
upon your time; I shall be delighted to cultivate your society when you
come back a gay bride; and pray tell Lady Melcomb I will not torment
her any more just now.--Once again accept my congratulations, and my
best compliments to Lord Melcomb, he, he, he!"

It is a strange thing that in the happiest of times there is often a
word spoken, or a thing occurs, which seems to interpose a dark spot
upon the brightness of happiness, as though we were not to forget the
nature of mortal felicity. Lady Ellersby's words, of six months will
not elapse ere you have changed your present feelings--sounded in Miss
Melcomb's ears long after they had been spoken; and though she strove
to drive them from her remembrance, they remained fixed there like a
warning which she was not to disregard--a foreboding of evil (for to
the happy all change has terror in it). Minor circumstances such as
this, have happened to every body in their course through life, and
have been like visions which opened a vista to futurity.

The day at length came which was to unite Miss Melcomb with Lord
Glenmore, and the various persons invited met at Lord Melcomb's house,
from whence their carriages followed in the suite of that of the
bride's. The ceremony took place in St. James's Chapel, and it was a
beautiful sight to see the bride, with composed bashfulness, in the
long white robe and coronal that bound her veiled brows, so fitly
emblematic of her own purity, supported by her father to the altar,
and given from the paternal arms into those of a husband, who was
henceforth to be all the world to her, and whom she acknowledged to be
lord of her affections in the seriousness of true and deep attachment,
as the chosen of her heart. Her velvet prayer book in one hand--the
other folding her veil across her person, which it but partially
concealed, she knelt down in that spirit of piety which hallows and
sanctifies the vows she was about to take. The previous tremor which
had shook her frame as she advanced to the altar, was stilled into
composure as she bent the knee, and raised her thoughts to heaven.

Lord Glenmore, too, seemed imbued with the same devout feelings, and
all those who came with lighter thoughts, appeared, outwardly at least,
impressed.

When the ceremony closed, the now Lady Glenmore knelt before her
parents, and as they pressed her to their breast, blessed her with
silent fervour; and even the most insensible acknowledged a touch of
feeling at this scene. Lady De Chere was heard to say, that she had
no idea it would be made such a serious affair of; had she known it,
she certainly would not have been present. Congratulations having been
offered on every side, some with sincere goodwill, but the greater
part with common-place phrase; the marriage party returned to Lady
Melcomb's, where a breakfast had been prepared.

"What a _mélange_ of persons!" observed Lady Ellersby, as she stopped
in the door-way on entering, in order to reconnoitre. "If I had not
been obliged" (she whispered to Lady Tilney), "nothing should have
brought me here."

"And _I_ most indubitably should not have come," replied the latter,
"had it not been to _oblige you_; and after all I would have given a
great deal that I _had not_: for I assure you, my dear, as soon as the
affair of the day is over, we must none of us be seen here again; what
we may do respecting Lord and Lady Glenmore, _reste a savoir_. But
yonder is Lady Baskerville and Lady Tenderden, let us join them, and
by keeping as much as possible together, and talking to no one but in
our own circle, shew that we are not here even at present on familiar
footing." Lady Baskerville was conversing with Lady Tenderden on one
of those square Ottomans _dos-a-dos_, with their several cavaliers by
them, Lord Tonnerre, Lord Gascoigne, Lord Boileau, &c.

"Well I am sure," said Lady Baskerville, addressing Lord Boileau,
"if I were Lady Glenmore, I should heartily wish all this _étiquette
de noces_ was over; when a marriage has taken place, and it is known
to all the world, the amusement is ended, and there is nothing to be
wished for, but the comfortable arrangement of two sensible persons,
who know what it is to live without being _a charge_ to each other."

"To be sure," replied Lord Boileau, "I wonder how people can make this
sort of fuss and _étalage_; it is assuming that one is interested for
them--nobody cares whether any body is happy or miserable, and it is a
bad taste to _affiché_ their private feelings in this public manner."

At this moment a general movement in one of the apartments attracted
every body's attention.--"Lord Melcomb is dead!" "Lord Melcomb is
dying!" resounded in audible whispers.

"Call my carriage."--"How shocking."--"I would not be in the room with
a corpse for the world."--"Do let us get away."

"Who knows but it may be catching--how fortunate for Glenmore," said
Lord Boileau, looking over the people's heads, as he beheld Lord
Melcomb apparently lifeless. "He will have the pretty heiress and her
fortune at the same moment."

"What do you mean?" asked some one who stood near.

"Why, only if the old Lord dies, that Miss Melcomb becomes immediate
mistress of Melcomb Park, and an estate of ten thousand a year."

"Does she! you do not mean so; had I known that, I would have proposed
to the girl myself," said Lord Tonnerre.

"But is he really in an apoplectic fit?" said another.

"Perhaps, but sometimes people do outlive these sort of things, and
walk about quite gaily many years."

"Ah! there is that chance to be sure," said Lady Baskerville, laughing.
It is lamentable to remark, how those who live in fashion's fooleries
become actually indifferent to every thing, and to every circumstance,
of what mighty moment soever, that does not immediately concern their
interests and pleasures. The most tremendous events, the most awful
dispensations, the most surprising occurrences are to them so many
little coloured bubbles, that seem to blow about for their amusement,
or targets set up to shoot jokes at. Life and death seem but as
foot-balls for these puppets to play with: it would be laughable if it
were not horrible.

Lord Melcomb had only a fainting fit, occasioned by over fatigue,
and the heat of the room. The brilliant crowd, however, which were
assembled at his house, fled in dismay on the first alarm of sickness
or of sorrow; and their inquiries the next day for his health, were
influenced more by curiosity, than by any feeling of humanity, or any
real care whether he were alive or dead. This event, however, had a
very different effect on the minds of Lord Melcomb's sincere friends,
who waited with anxiety to learn the effects of this sudden illness.
On Lady Glenmore's mind it cast a cloud, which seemed to overshadow
the bright dawning of her happiness; and she trembled at the idea of
some unknown calamity, an idea which had once before visited her, when
called up by Lady Ellersby's words, and which now again recurred to her
with painful intenseness. A short hour, however, relieved every one
from anxiety; Lord Melcomb was completely restored, and he received the
embraces of his child: when kissing away the tears, which she could
not restrain, he entreated her to lay aside all fears on his account.
Once more the bridal pair received the parental blessing; and taking
leave of the few dear friends that surrounded them, stepped into their
carriage and set off for Lord Glenmore's villa, where after remaining a
short time, and feeling quite reassured on Lord Melcomb's account, they
proceeded on a tour to Paris.




CHAPTER XI.

A FASHIONABLE EASTER.


The season was approaching when, in good old times, the heads of great
families left the metropolis, and in the retirement of their country
seats or villas devoted the precious hours of the solemn festival of
Easter to reflection, apart from busy scenes of public life in the
bosoms of their families--thus setting an example worthy of imitation:
and overcoming, in some degree, the difficulty with which we know a
rich man shall enter the Kingdom of Heaven.

How widely different is it at the present day with those who call
themselves _The Ton_. They go indeed, at this holy season, to villas,
and country seats, but take with them there all the follies, and vices,
and habits of that daily idleness and dissipation which can suffer no
pause in its riot, no diminution in its intoxication.

Lady Ellersby had invited to Restormel Lady Tilney and the more select
of her coterie. Some there were, the subalterns of their _corps élite_,
who, however subservient and ready they had proved themselves to
adopt the follies of exclusiveness, had as yet failed in establishing
themselves in its full rights and prerogatives, and who, after the
sacrifice of their own true dignity, still found themselves but as
tools in the hands of others. These, often overlooked in the more
_recherché_ amusements, _heard_ of the party at Restormel, but only
_heard_, and were not among the invited. To be excluded on such an
occasion was a mortification of the severest kind, and it became a
matter of the greatest importance to have their names inserted, if
possible, on the select list. To obtain this point, the infinite pains
and ingenuity employed were worthy of a better cause. The Baskervilles
were of the number overlooked; and, addressing his wife on the subject
with as much eagerness as it was permitted one of his dignified
refinement to display, Lord Baskerville said:

"Imagine what Boileau has just told me; Lady Ellersby has a party at
Restormel next week! I do think _we_ had a right to be asked; don't
you?"

"Oh certainly, _love_," replied Lady Baskerville, a sweet-sounding
epithet of affection which but on few occasions passed between them:
"Certainly: and if we are not, I shall think it quite rude; but _I
will_ arrange the matter."

That night Lady Baskerville went to the Opera with Lady Boileau; as
soon as an opportunity presented itself, Lady Baskerville turned
suddenly round, and said, "Oh, there is Lady Ellersby, I see, in her
box: how well she looks--of _course you_ are going to Restormel at
Easter?" and she kissed her hand the while, in her most smiling manner,
to the lady of whom she spoke.

"No, I am not invited," replied Lady Boileau. "Are you?"

"Yes," rejoined Lady Baskerville, (determined to hazard the lie at
all events, and trust to chance, or her own devices, to make it true
afterwards.) "But how very odd she should have left you out; it must be
some mistake."

"Oh, no, it is not a mistake--it cannot be; for Lady Ellersby, you
know, makes all her invitations on these occasions _de vive voix_."
Lady Baskerville almost betrayed herself as she _felt_ Lady Boileau's
penetrating eyes fixed upon her's, with a scrutiny she did not wish to
prolong; however she rallied dexterously, and turned off the discourse
into some other channel; but Lady Boileau returned to the charge,
saying:

"Well, my dear Lady Baskerville, as _you are_ asked, do you not think
you could get us invited also? You know I hardly ever break my rule of
running the risk of compromising a friend by tormenting her to procure
invitations, but for this once I think I may venture, considering
our long friendship, to entrust you with the secret (for you know I
would not have it said for the world), that I wish to be of the number
of the _Priées_ to Restormel--now as I intend giving my first ball
immediately after Easter, I shall consult her to-night about certain
persons whom I am rather doubtful whether I shall ask or not, and then
by appealing to you, throw the conversation into your hands, and give
you an opportunity of naming those who are invited to Restormel, which
will bring about the subject in such a natural way, that either I must
be asked or she will commit herself by a rudeness which she generally
avoids."

Lady Baskerville sat on thorns, but during the length of this speech
she had leisure to collect her scattered senses, and began a reply
equally elaborate, professing herself to be exceedingly attached and
obliged to Lady Boileau, and for _that very reason_ declining all
interference on the present occasion--"for you know," she said, "it
makes one so very _nervous_ to put a friend under the unpleasant
predicament of being refused. Besides, the moment one lets the
world know that one has a friend who wants any thing, people begin
immediately to conclude that they may want many things, and directly
look shy, and make an excuse, and get off, and probably cut both the
_asker_ and the person for whom they ask. However _you know_ I will do
what _I can do_, but only I entreat you will leave me at liberty to
chuse the mode of managing this business."

"Yes," rejoined Lady Boileau, "most certainly; but perhaps the best way
of all will be to say nothing about it, beforehand, and then for me to
arrive unexpectedly, and say _you_ had asked me, and had forgotten to
mention to Lady Ellersby that you had done so."

"Oh! _not for the world_, my dearest Lady Boileau, not for the
world,--besides,--I just recollect--Lord Baskerville had some idea
we should not go at all;"--at that instant arrives Lord Baskerville
himself, and forgetting his acquired manner, he opened the box-door
somewhat abruptly, and in his natural gay agreeable way, such as is his
own when he ceases to remember he is an exclusive, he said, addressing
Lady Baskerville,

"I have this instant had an invitation for you, which I am sure you
will accept with pleasure: it is from Lady Ellersby to go to Restormel."

"Dear! la! Lord Baskerville, how odd you are--that is so like you--to
have forgot--and Lady Ellersby too, she must have forgotten, don't you
know _we were_ asked a fortnight ago."

"Ah--hem! very true," and taking the hint which Lady Baskerville had
given him by an expressive glance, "hem! I _had_ really forgotten, I
always forget _those sort of things_, hem!"

"Yes, and you said then, _if you_ remember, that _you_ would not go,
for that you thought of visiting Tunbridge, as you always conceived
Restormel to be a dull, damp place, and so unwholesome, with its
quantity of trees and stagnant water."

"Ay--so I did,--hem! very true, and so it is, and now you put me in
mind, I rather suppose _we_, that is _I_, shall not go, for of course
_your_ ladyship will do as you chuse."

Lady Boileau, though young in years, was too old a bird of fashion
to be caught with chaff, she saw through this matrimonial manœuvre,
but was too prudent to let her perception be seen; and in regard to
Lady Baskerville's refusal on the subject of Restormel, she pretended
to take it as the latter intended it should be taken, and her outward
appearance remained unruffled, but at the same time it was marked
in the tablets of her memory, as a token of friendship _not to be
forgotten_.

"Indeed," replied Lady Boileau, in answer to Lord Baskerville's last
remark, "you are both quite right, Restormel _is_ a _dull_ place, and
I advise you to secure a party for Tunbridge, in which I shall be most
happy to join you."

"I will think about it, hem!" replied Lord Baskerville, "and consult
the Comtesse Leinsengen," and thus he bowed out of the box. Shortly
after, Lady Baskerville feigned a very bad head-ache and retired before
the end of the ballet. Not so Lady Boileau; she watched Lady Ellersby's
movements, and contrived to meet her in the room just at the very
moment when the crowd prevented her escaping.

"What do you think I have been doing all night?" Lady Boileau asked?

"Not listening to the Opera," replied Mr. Spencer Newcomb, who was
handing Lady Ellersby.

"As if any body ever really came to attend to or listen to it!" she
observed; "it is the very last thing one comes to the Opera for,"
yawning.

"I have been much better employed," rejoined Lady Boileau, "for I
have been defending the _agrémens_ of Restormel against Lord and Lady
Baskerville's assertion of its being the dullest place in the world;
they both declared it always gave them the vapours."

"So it does me," replied Lady Ellersby, again yawning, "and that is
precisely the reason why I take such special care never to go there,
without having it well filled. But then all places in the country are
alike, and one _must_ go out of town at Easter."

"Well, Lady Ellersby, that may be true enough: all country places are
insufferably dull except it be to give a fête during the lilac and
laburnum season; but I think your friends might make some distinction
between _you_ and your _place_, and as far as I could observe there was
none made by the Baskervilles."

"Oh was there _not_, he, he! Oh if such _is_ the case I am sorry I
asked them to-night."

"To-night! did you not make Lady Baskerville the invitation long
before to-night? you will pardon my asking the question; I have a
particular reason, which I will explain to you hereafter, for doing so."

"La, dear, no," yawning, "I never thought of asking any body _long
ago_." This, though in contradiction to her former declaration of
taking care to _secure_ a party, she was obliged to say in order to
avoid a marked rudeness to Lady Boileau, "and," she continued, "now
I have the good fortune to meet you, dear Lady Boileau, will you
and Lord Boileau have the charity to join us; and, notwithstanding
Lady Baskerville's terrific account of Restormel, venture to come
and _egayer_ its melancholy bowers; at all events it will be better
than remaining in town, and we will try to do what we can to render
ourselves agreeable to you."

"I shall be delighted; we shall have the greatest pleasure in waiting
upon you, and am certain we shall be extremely well amused."

The great object of Lady Boileau's day was now successfully attained,
and doubtless she laid her head upon her pillow that night with all the
satisfaction which such success ought to confer. Lady Baskerville, on
her part rejoiced in having as she thought so completely outmanœuvred
her friend, and enjoyed the triumph which her superior skill in the
management of such matters, as well as her superior knowledge of _the
world_, had afforded her. Yet these women called each other _friends_!
How is that sacred name profaned, that name which can have no embodied
existence, but with the sincere and good, yet which is polluted in the
world's mouth at every instant.

Restormel was, as it had been described by Lady Baskerville, an
exceedingly gloomy place, but all within the house was luxury; beyond
its walls, however, there were none of those moral circumstances which
can give interest even to the dullest spot. The scenery was monotonous
and insipid; but there might have been an enlivening character thrown
over the gloom, in the happy countenances and cheerful looks of
dependents and retainers, if such had been the will of the possessors
of Restormel. But this was not the case, the cold calculating system
of employment of the poor, merely when the purpose of keeping up the
grounds or other improvements made it necessary, and then taking no
further charge whatever of the beings so employed, regarding them only
as the labourers of the hour, conspired to give the place a moral, as
well as a natural gloom.

No peasant's abode in these domains was ever cheered by Lady Ellersby's
presence; no sufferer in sickness or distress alleviated beyond the
donation of money, and that but seldom;--none of those heart-interests
in short were ever evinced, on her, or her Lord's part, which confer a
mutual delight on those who receive, and on those who bestow them, and
which maintain that link between the higher and lower classes, which
is at once so beautiful and so beneficial, and without which all the
luxuries in the world will never produce any thing but a melancholy and
unsatisfying grandeur.

There certainly, however, were the means, if they had been resorted
to, for every laudable gratification of interest and entertainment at
Restormel. And where is the country place in which, if its possessor
fulfil the various duties the possession entails on him, the means are
wanting; and even as it was, if that sickly appetite for excitement
which characterised its present inhabitants could ever have been
satisfied, it must have been here, where every thing connected with
their system of life was found in profusion; but the factitious smiles
which gild the exterior of such a circle as was generally to be met
with at Restormel is not the sunshine of real happiness.

Easter was now arrived and the party assembled at Restormel, consisted
of the Tilneys, the Tenderdens, the Baskervilles, the Leinsengens,
Luttermannes, Lord Tonnerre, Lady Hamlet Vernon, Lord Albert D'Esterre
(who was asked _on trial_), Lord and Lady Boileau, by the manœuvre
which has been described, and one or two single men like Mr. Leslie
Winyard, Mr. Spencer Newcomb, &c. &c.

These persons all met on the first night of their arrival at an eight
o'clock dinner. Lord Albert D'Esterre had been invited at Lady Tilney's
suggestion, who considered a country house a good stage for the display
of a new _debutant_, and as affording no unpropitious opportunity of
forwarding her wishes in regard to Lord Albert's political bias. These
wishes, however, were soon doomed to disappointment; Lord Albert had
accepted the invitation under the impression that in the country there
was more leisure and tranquillity than the hurry of a London life
allowed; but whether in the country or town, he might have known, had
not the fatal mist of delusion which comes over all who enter on a
tortuous path began to blind him, that reflection and serenity of mind
do not depend on time or place; that power, that calm, may be destroyed
or may be nurtured in cities, as in lonely wilds, it is true; but had
he thought for a moment, he would have felt that the gay assemblage in
which he was to mix at Restormel, was not calculated to restore him to
that state of mind which he believed himself anxious to regain.

In the course of Lord Albert D'Esterre's acquaintance with Lady Hamlet
Vernon, he had discovered much to charm, to dazzle, and to lead a mind
so young as his into a maze of error. Sophistry had gradually drawn
its veil before his perception of truth; through this he viewed her
character; and under the same delusive influence, he persuaded himself
that the interest he took in her arose from the purest motive, namely
that of endeavouring to free from error, one whose nature was naturally
endowed with capabilities for becoming truly estimable. He listened to
all her dangerous and seductive opinions, while he gazed on her beauty,
bewildered with the false conviction that he did so to prove to her the
error of the one, and to point out the peril which, with such unfixed
tenets, the other would most probably lead her into.

What a melancholy prospect, he inwardly exclaimed, lies before that
beautiful creature, whose principles have never been formed to virtue,
and who has been cast among those whose every axiom is contrary to the
laws of purity and truth! What delight in the reflection, what a good
action it will be, to disentangle such a being from the snares that
surround her, and restore her to a life of usefulness and happiness. My
heart aches for her, when I think how in early youth, before she could
know her own wishes, she was married to an unprincipled husband, one
who could never have known her worth; she must not be abandoned without
an effort to save her. Thus did Lord Albert parley with himself, till
a dangerous admixture of evil glided in with his better feelings, and
prevented that clear perception between right and wrong, which under
his engagements should have made him at once fly from Lady Hamlet
Vernon. It was _not_ so, however, and Lady Hamlet Vernon was more the
object that led him to Restormel, than any wish for, or sense of, the
necessity of retirement and reflection.

The mode of living at Restormel was what Spencer Newcomb wittily
called the _foreign system_, that is, every pleasure-giving
circumstance was throughout the daily routine cultivated to the utmost
point which art could reach. To give an account of it in detail would
be a work of supererogation; for it was a transfer of London to the
country, only with this difference, that the post town and high road
took place of the streets of the metropolis; and the shrubberies and
gardens of Restormel, of those of Kensington and the Park; with the
exception, too, of a rather animated discussion between Lady Tilney and
Lord Tonnerre on the subject of female influence; and which brought the
parties into closer collision, than was consistent with the outward
harmony of exclusive _ton_.

Little occurred during the first few days of the retreat to Restormel
to vary the monotony of the scene. With reference to this latter
subject, Lady Tilney remarked to Lady Baskerville, as they left the
dining-room, on the evening when the affair alluded to had taken place,
"I am very sorry, my dear Lady Baskerville, very sorry indeed, that
what I said should have taken such a desperate effect on your friend
Lord Tonnerre; however, it does every body good to hear the truth now
and then, and as he seldom if ever hears it, I think I have done him
service in sounding that tocsin in his ears for once in his life, don't
you, my dear?"

"He, he, he!" tittered Lady Baskerville, who did not like to offend
the speaker, though she was really angry with her in her heart; "I
dare say you are quite right--but for my part, I never wish to teach
any body any thing; I was so tired of being taught myself, that
whatever reminds me of the dull days of being a good girl, and having a
governess, quite overcomes me."

"Oh," observed the Comtesse Leinsengen, "what sinnify, whether dat Lord
is in a passion or not, nothing will ever change him. He knows but two
phrases in the dictionary, _I will_ and _I won't_, you _shall_ and
you _shan't_, and he do tink himself, and all dat belong to himself,
quite perfect, _c'est une ignorance crasse a tout prendre_, but what
_sinnify_ it? He was alway Milor Tonnerre, he _is_ Milor Tonnerre, he
will alway _be_ Milor Tonnerre; _laisser le grogner, c'est son métier;
en qualité de Tonnerre il grognera toujours, quesque ça nous fait? il
n'est pas notre mari laisse-le là de grâces_," and she looked at Lady
Baskerville as she spoke.

This affair, however, did not pass over quite so easily as Lady
Tilney would have had it; and it ended in Lord Tonnerre's going
suddenly to town; and Lady Baskerville remaining in exceedingly bad
humour: for to be without an _attaché quelconque_ was as bad as to be
without a hat from Herbot's.




CHAPTER XII.

FASCINATION--THE CHURCH-YARD, &c.


In a continued scene of frivolity, to call it by no harsher name, and
in the turmoil of petty passions and jarring female interests, passed
the hours at Restormel that led on to the most solemn period of the
year. Amongst the actors in it, Lord Albert D'Esterre cannot (with the
feelings and character which he still possessed) be supposed to have
held a part at all consistent with his true wishes; and, but for the
increasing and alarming fascination of his senses, and the warping of
his better judgment, by the influence which Lady Hamlet Vernon still,
day by day, more effectually exercised over him, he would have quitted
a society altogether, of which he could never really form a component
part, and _from_ which, but for the third power which held him in
combination with it, he must have quickly separated himself.

But, however much this fatal influence might affect the general line of
his conduct, the good seeds sown in early life, though sadly choaked as
they had been, were not yet totally eradicated; and on the morning of
the Easter festival, he took his way to the village to obey the calling
bell of church. The service had begun when he entered, and it was not
till the first lesson was commenced that he lifted his eyes from the
book, and beheld in the family pew opposite Lady Hamlet Vernon. A flush
of various feelings coloured his cheek, and suffused with a richer glow
even the whiteness of his forehead. She is then, he thought, in despite
of the example around her, really good;--she has listened to my advice;
she has come to the fountain-head for instruction--all is well! He then
endeavoured to follow the service throughout its solemn beauty; but his
mind was disturbed, and his thoughts wandered.

When the congregation was dismissed, of course he bowed and approached
Lady Hamlet Vernon with the greetings of the morning salutations, and
offering her his arm, they walked slowly on into the church-yard;
it was one of those quiet gray days, which belong neither to winter
nor spring, but owned affinity with both, and there was a freshness
in the odour of the new trodden grass, which might have been deemed
the precursor of flowers, had not a frosty air chilled the sweet
promise;--some fine old yews surrounded the church-yard, and the
gay colours of the country peoples' ribbons and cloaks appeared in
brilliant relief as they lingered beneath the dark boughs.

The rustic curtsey, and abrupt inclination of respect, which were
offered in homage to Lord D'Esterre and Lady Hamlet Vernon on either
side, as they passed through the village throng, indicated that the
actions of those in the higher ranks of life can never be disregarded
by the lower; a kind of deep respect, and an apparent satisfaction,
sat on the countenances of these good people, and they showed by their
very looks and manner, that they felt the hallowing of the sabbath to
be a link of sympathy existing between them and their superiors, which
mutually allied them in the bonds of christian fellowship.

These are feelings which, even in the uneducated, are still indigenous
to the human heart, and, if cherished and preserved, become as
productive of good as, when neglected or contemned, they tend to
incalculable evil. As Lord Albert and Lady Hamlet Vernon passed along,
the latter observed:

"I love to linger here; these rude memorials of love and respect to
the dead" (pointing to the graves at their feet) "are a mournful
gratification to the living; they tell us that in our turn we may at
least hope to remain some short time in the memories of those whom we
quit; but after all, _tout passe_," and she sighed heavily;--"yes,
_here_ undoubtedly all that the proudest trophies can do, is for a time
to point the moral of a good or bad character by the stone that covers
or decorates the tomb."

"But the tomb, dear Lady Hamlet, is only the repository of the dust;
it will itself become like the dust it covers; but never, like that
awakened dust, be infused with new life, a life far more glorious than
all that we can form an idea of; and we must look not _upon_, not _in_
the grave, but beyond it, where death is swallowed up in victory."

"_You_ can do this, and you are happy," she replied. A cold revulsion
struck on Lord Albert's heart as she paused and breathed with labouring
breath,--"and can _you_ not do so?" he asked in deep low tone and
shuddered as he spoke. She shook her head; and after a moment's pause
said, "all the happiness I know is confined to a few brief moments--a
few electric gleams of pleasure, which vanish in their birth; a
feverish uncertain and fearful catching at delight, which yet eludes
my grasp. These are all the means which I possess to obtain happiness;
yet, such as they are, and such as my success in them is, I would not
exchange them for yours--what! exchange your cold, leaden, measured
_theories of feelings_, for they are nothing more--or the beating pulse
of spontaneous joy, which even in this moment of our communing is mine;
no, Lord Albert, no--meanly as I think of myself when measured by your
standard in the general tenour of our existence, and in the scale of
being, there are moments when I soar above all that was ever dreamt of
in your philosophy,"--and as she spoke her eyes danced in a deceptive
brilliancy that for the moment turned Lord Albert's brain. He shuddered
as he felt the pressure of her arm on his while she uttered these
words, and his uncertain footsteps slid upon the base of a marble tomb.

In the action of recovering himself, a kind of change seemed to pass
through his frame; so much are we influenced by trivial circumstances,
which yet are surely not the agents of chance; in so doing his eyes
rested on an inscription engraven on the stone, and as if glad to
escape from answering her, he read the following lines:

    They were so one, it never could be said
    Which of them ruled, or which of them obeyed;
    He ruled because she would obey, and she
    By him obeying, ruled as well as he.
    There ne'er was known betwixt them a dispute,
    Save which the other's will should execute.

"The lines are indeed beautiful," said Lady Hamlet Vernon, "and I
could be content to be the mould under that stone, if I had ever
enjoyed an existence to which they might with truth have been
applied--but as it is, _non ragionam di lor_;" and she sprang lightly
forwards, adding in a tone of affected levity, "let us make haste back
to Restormel; why, dear Lord Albert, we shall be laughed at if it is
known that we have been to church." The spell was broken, he made no
reply, and they continued the remainder of their walk in silence.

"Hard, cold, insensate man!" cried Lady Hamlet Vernon, when she
reached her own apartment; "but he shall be met with an equal share of
self-love. I will subdue this haughty nature, and mock at him, when his
hour of suffering arrives. If he loved passionately any thing, even
that doll, that infant, that piece of clock-work Lady Adeline Seymour,
I could forgive him; but he does not, it is a systematical pursuit of
an ideal perfection, that leaves his heart always cold and untouched,
and fenced round as it were with adamant. Proud D'Esterre, thou shalt
weep for this"--and she paused for a moment, then collecting all her
thoughts, her final resolution was taken, and availing herself of a
communication which she had to make to Mr. Foley, who she trusted
might be instrumental to her purpose, with a breaking heart, and with
contending feelings she seized a pen, and traced the following letter:

 "I am happy to inform you, my dear Mr. Foley, that the official
 patronage, which you have long wished me to procure for you, is now
 actually obtained, and your arrival in town is all that is wanted
 to arrange the necessary preliminaries. A letter received yesterday
 informs me of this; but in the interim, I wish you could make it
 convenient to pass a few days here on your road to London; for between
 ourselves, this place and its society is insufferably dull; and were
 it not for tilt and tournament between Lord Tonnerre and Lady Tilney
 (who you know under the rose cannot hear each other,) we must have
 all gone to sleep, or torn one another to pieces, or eaten our own
 paws, like antediluvian hyenas, from the absolute want of mental
 nourishment. But in this predicament, resembling people reduced to
 starvation on a sea voyage, we cast lots to see who should first
 be sacrificed for the benefit of the rest, and fortunately by the
 address of Lady Tilney, the lot was made to fall on Lord Tonnerre,
 who finished his existence amongst us, as he always lived, in a storm
 of passion; the only one of the party, I believe, who regrets his
 absence, is Lady Baskerville, who is now _sans cavalier_, and in the
 Roman phraseology, _d'impeccarsi_. I advise you then by all means to
 come quickly, and to supply the vacancy.

 "But to leave joking, I must tell you my dear friend, that I languish
 for a rational companion, and one who will kindly enter into my
 feelings; nobody understands me here;--too good, and too bad, I am
 like Mahomet's tomb, hanging between heaven and earth, and I find no
 resting place for my sick soul, nor shall I, 'till you come with your
 kindly smile, to solace my weary spirit. Come, therefore, and that
 without delay, for you well know that when any thing is to be done, it
 had best be done quickly--all delays are dangerous, and with me they
 are despair.

 "Would you wish to know something of those you will meet here? I have
 only to mention their names, and refer you to our old note book; I see
 no great visible change in any of them. Mr. Spencer Newcombe has been
 here for a few days, and is certainly the _most_ diverting man in the
 world; and well he may be, for he lives entirely for that purpose.

 "Lord Albert D'Esterre is here also; he sets up for a censor and
 corrector of men, manners, and things. He will have enough to do,
 if he persists in this unpopular walk; but I am much mistaken, if
 he will not soon find it a very arduous undertaking, and one indeed
 which is quite hopeless. If he were but content to do as other people
 do, who live in the world, and to be a little more like his day and
 generation, and a little less of Don Quixotte, he would really be a
 pleasant person. He does not, _par parenthèse_, seem in a hurry to
 join his betrothed, which I think is rather a good sign; for I should
 have but a poor opinion of a man who did as papa and mamma ordered,
 and fell in love precisely as he had been desired to do in the days of
 his childhood.

 "The Tilney, the Leinsengen, the Baskerville, the Boileau, go on in
 their usual way; and like the old quotation, though they all differ,
 yet they all agree in one thing at least, which is wishing the society
 of your agreeable self; so under pain of not only my displeasure,
 but that of all the world's, come quickly, and delay not. Adieu, and
 believe me to be the most true of your true friends.

     "H. V."

In consequence of the occurrence of Lord Albert's morning walk, he
felt little inclined to join the circle on his return to Restormel; and
was in a mood too replete with contradictory feelings, to allow him to
reflect calmly, still less to enable him to decide sanely upon the only
vigorous step he should have taken, namely, to flee from temptation.
He excused himself under the plea of being unwell, from leaving his
own room; and sitting down with a determination of communing with
his own heart, he found not the habit so easy, after long neglect;
and was conscious that he mused, without deriving any fruit from his
contemplations.

But by degrees, this confusion of mind subsided; and then came that
soothing composure, which, after a state of emotion, is always welcomed
with something like pleasure. He opened a favourite author, Owen
Feltham; and he could not read long, without seeing his own necessities
reflected in the page, as in a glass; this is one way by which to prove
whether a moral or religious work be sterling or not, does it apply to
our necessities? does it first probe, and then salve our wounds? Lord
Albert D'Esterre found this book did both; and in its perusal, there
was a sanctity of enjoyment to which he had been long a stranger. This
enjoyment was, however, too soon disturbed by his servant bringing in a
note; he felt it as an unwelcome intrusion; but it was opened after a
moment's hesitation, and contained the following words:

 "I am anxious to know how you really are. I too am unwell, and I dread
 lest I should have have said or done something this morning, which
 may have offended you--oh! if you know how terrible it is for those
 who have none to care for them, to suppose for an instant that they
 have given pain (however, unwittingly) to the only person whose good
 opinion they are anxious to possess, and who has evinced an interest
 in their welfare--you would now feel for me. I am not of those who
 make a display of their heart's feelings--far from it, I am a miser of
 the few treasures which lie hoarded there; it is for that reason that
 I mingle with the rest, as though I were one of _them_; and that I am
 now writing these troubled lines in the midst of the insipid turmoil
 which surrounds me; _tout comme si de rien étoit_. Aid me in bearing
 my grievous burthen of existence, and send me one line to be a cordial
 for the moment at least; the present moment's ease is all I ever hope
 for."

What an overturn to all composure was conveyed in this little bit of
perfumed paper; fifty commencements of reply were made and torn; at
last he rang his bell, summoned his valet, and having given a verbal
answer to the effect that he would shortly obey the commands of Lady
Hamlet Vernon, he appeared in the drawing-room almost as soon as she
could have expected a written reply. She was sitting apart from the
rest of the company with a look of abstractedness and melancholy, the
effect of which was heightened by extreme paleness; her beautiful dark
hair was less carefully arranged than the laws of fashion demanded, but
it was not the less beautiful for that, and some stray tresses fell
gracefully upon her neck; her air, her dress, the subdued expression of
her eyes, were all captivating, and precisely in Lord Albert's _own_
way.

There was a carelessness or scorn of _fashionable_ dress, which
particularly suited his theories on the subject, not that his practical
admiration had not fifty times been excited by a very different mode of
attire; for the fact is, that men's tastes in respect to the costume of
women are always regulated by that of the person they are in love with.
On this occasion, however, it is certain that Lady Hamlet's attire was
in the letter and in the spirit precisely what Lord Albert D'Esterre
pronounced perfect. She held out her hand to him as he entered the
saloon with the composed air of friendship, and expressed her pleasure
at seeing him, for she had feared his indisposition would not have
allowed him to leave his room: and then motioning him to sit down by
her with that expression of calm interest, which attracts without
affording any plausible application of the sentiment to a more vivid
interest, she secured her object, and he occupied the vacant seat next
to her's. Mr. Leslie Winyard, who was playing _écarté_ (even on the
sacred day) with Lady Boileau, while the rest were studying and betting
on the game, called to Lord D'Esterre, "ah! Lord Albert, we have all
been guessing the reason of your absence; one said writing letters
of love, another sleeping; but the successful guess was given to my
penetrating judgment, writing a sermon on the vanities of human life,
that is, holding up to censure all that we your friends are doing."

"I assure you, Mr. Leslie Winyard, that you have not proved your
judgment infallible; for I do not plead guilty either to _your_ charge,
or to any of the others."

"Well, then, join in our game; Lady Boileau intends to beat me, and
I'll vacate my seat in your favour, and, in parliamentary phrase,
accept at the same time as many hundreds as you may choose to give me."

"Pardon me," said Lord Albert, "I cannot."

"Did you suppose Lady Hamlet Vernon would let him do so?" whispered
Lady Baskerville.

"That may be," replied Leslie Winyard, "but my life for it that is not
his reason, he will not play because it is Sunday."

"Sunday, is it?" yawned Lady Ellersby; "dear me! I did not know it was
Sunday."

"Leslie Winyard declares you will not play because it is Sunday, Lord
Albert D'Esterre," exclaimed Mr. Spencer Newcomb.

"Whatever may be my motive, or my fancy for not playing," replied Lord
Albert, "I conceive that it is at variance with the high good breeding
of this circle to inquire further into the matter, though, if it will
afford any satisfaction to Mr. Leslie Winyard, I have not the smallest
hesitation to give to him those motives."

"I am bounden to you, my Lord," rejoined the latter, putting his hand
to his heart, "but for the moment waive the honour of hearing more,
being at the very crisis of the game," and so saying he turned to the
card-table, and left Lord D'Esterre to the undisturbed enjoyment of his
conversation with Lady Hamlet Vernon.

She first broke silence (speaking in a low tone). "How many misnomers
there are in the world; this society considers itself the mode and
paragon of manners and of fashion--the world _par excellence_; and yet
the members of it are always doing or saying something to offend the
feelings of each other. Why was a being like myself thrown amongst
them? one who sees their falsehood and folly, and yet cannot escape
from it. But on the contrary, every day as it passes seems more and
more to entangle me. I possess indeed one friend, from whom I look
for consolation; but _he_, like every one in this world, has his own
troubles, and indeed I have sometimes feared, that is I fear"--she
broke off abruptly as if to find a suitable expression for what
she would say, then again continued after a pause--"that I did not
altogether act a generous part by him; one may excite a deeper interest
than one intends, for it is so soothing to a desolate heart, to find
any one whom it can like, and rest upon, that it is easy to be betrayed
into a conduct, that would afterwards perhaps render one obnoxious to
the imputation of coquetry; the character for which of all others, I
have the most decided contempt. I have not yet learnt from you, Lord
Albert D'Esterre," laying particular emphasis on her words, "that
firm independence of mind, which never yields under circumstances;
for whatever vain disputation I may hold with myself, I find I am
continually yielding to the influence of events, and floating down
the tide of life, guided more by impulse, than by principle. It will
perhaps be as well in the end--who knows?"

Lord Albert D'Esterre had listened with evident pain to the sophistry
these words contained, and as Lady Hamlet Vernon paused, added in his
most impressive manner:

"Oh! dear Lady Hamlet Vernon, I fear it will undoubtedly _not_ be well
with us in the end, if we live by chance; and we may all know, if we
chuse to know, that so to live will prove our condemnation."

"Persuade me of _that_, teach me your knowledge, and I will act upon
it; give me your conviction and I will bless you."

"Surely," thought Lord Albert D'Esterre, "it is my duty to reclaim
this person from the unhappy and destructive errors into which she has
fallen; it would be altogether wrong, it would be barbarous, to abandon
one, who calls upon me for aid, who appeals to _me_ for instruction."
Not but another view of the subject crossed his mind, for thoughts, as
we all know, flow in from contradictory sources.

"Surely the friend to whom you allude, and on whom you say you rely,
will be a far more able instructor than I can be."

"Ay, so he might (she replied) if"----"If what?"----"If I durst on all
occasions apply to him--but--but there are existing reasons to which I
before alluded, and which I now frankly tell you, have frequently made
me deny myself the consolation of his society. We shall see how things
are now, when we are to meet again after a long absence."

Lord Albert D'Esterre could scarcely misunderstand the meaning which
these words implied, and he was too delicate to press the matter
further; but when they separated for the night, the chief point which
was impressed on Lord Albert's mind was, that Lady Hamlet Vernon
was beloved by Mr. Foley, and if she did not positively return that
sentiment in its full degree, that she owned a preference in his
favour, to which it was very nearly allied. Yet if it were so, why
should that circumstance cause him uneasiness? It could only be from
the interest he had imbibed for a person, who seemed intended for a
higher and better career than the one she was pursuing.

Men, even the very best of men, frequently deceive themselves on
similar occasions; they are not, perhaps, _in love_, they do not mean
to be so; still less is it their intention deliberately to awaken an
interest which they feel they cannot return: but though they are few,
who would attempt to _win_ a heart under these circumstances, and
merely for the triumph of doing so; _all_ are not sufficiently free
from vanity to _refuse_ one, when spontaneously offered, nor, while its
possession can be valued for the passing gratification of self-love
_only_, voluntarily forego the distinction which its homage affords.
That such was the predicament in which Lord Albert D'Esterre stood, or
that such was the train of his thoughts, it would be difficult to say.

Lady Hamlet Vernon's conduct and manners towards himself certainly
betrayed partiality, which it was impossible to avoid seeing; but it
was equally impossible to attach to them the decided character of love;
and even were it so, Lord Albert stood pledged to an engagement of
the most sacred nature, and one which had it been intimated to him he
could have abandoned, he would have started from the contemplation of
its possibility; still, however, his mind was under delusion in regard
to Lady Hamlet Vernon, and the interest which he would have persuaded
himself was felt for her sake only, was, it is to be feared, nearly
allied to a sentiment, which in his circumstances never should have
been entertained.

If, however, Lord Albert D'Esterre was wandering in the maze of
undefined resolution, and with an uncertainty of object, in all his
speculations, not so Lady Hamlet Vernon, who well marked the nature of
the interest she was gradually acquiring over him, and which she hoped
soon to see augmented in a degree which would render him completely her
own.

Many days did not elapse from this time before Mr. Foley arrived.
With that refinement of tact which all women understand so well, Lady
Hamlet Vernon made her first approach towards the object she had in
view, by producing between Mr. Foley and Lord Albert D'Esterre a mutual
partiality.

She effected this, as is often successfully done, by repeating
favourable opinions respecting each, which were uttered, or were
not uttered, as it chanced by the parties one of another; "_mais on
ne s'avise jamais de tout_," and there was one circumstance which
operated against her wishes whilst cementing their intimacy. Thus was
the influence which Mr. Foley's vivid description and praises of the
attractions of Lady Adeline Seymour produced on Lord Albert D'Esterre's
mind. Although somewhat diminished by absence and by the too great
security he felt of conceiving her to be beyond the possibility of
change, these attractions still retained their power, and it needed but
the description which he more than once listened to of her beauty and
her worth, as the theme was dwelt upon by Mr. Foley, to revive in him
all the latent feelings of his love and admiration for her. After this
revival of the natural allegiance of his heart, Lord Albert D'Esterre
started from his wayward dream as though he had been warned by his
better angel. Shaking off the listless unaccountable thraldom which had
of late palsied his resolution, he ordered post-horses, and determined
to set off for Dunmelraise the very next day.


END OF VOL. I.


LONDON:
PRINTED BY J. L. COX, GREAT QUEEN STREET.




TRANSCRIBER'S NOTE:

Obvious printer errors have been corrected. Otherwise, the author's
original spelling, punctuation and hyphenation have been left intact.





End of Project Gutenberg's The Exclusives, Vol I., by Charlotte Campbell Bury


        
            *** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE EXCLUSIVES (VOL. 1 OF 3) ***
        

    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Exclusives (vol. 2 of 3)
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: The Exclusives (vol. 2 of 3)


Author: Lady Charlotte Campbell Bury

Release date: October 13, 2017 [eBook #55745]

Language: English

Credits: Produced by Chris Whitehead and the Online Distributed
        Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
        produced from images generously made available by The
        Internet Archive)


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE EXCLUSIVES (VOL. 2 OF 3) ***




Produced by Chris Whitehead and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from images generously made available by The
Internet Archive)









/*
THE
EXCLUSIVES.

VOL. II.
*/




/*
THE
EXCLUSIVES.

IN THREE VOLUMES.

VOL. II.

SECOND EDITION.

LONDON:
HENRY COLBURN AND RICHARD BENTLEY,
NEW BURLINGTON STREET.

1830.
*/




/*
LONDON:

Printed by J. L. Cox, Great Queen Street,
Lincoln's-Inn Fields.
*/




THE EXCLUSIVES.




CHAPTER I.

THE CLOSING SCENE AT RESTORMEL.


On the evening previous to Lord Albert's
departure, while Mr. Foley and Lady Hamlet
Vernon were intently engaged in playing at
chess, Lord Albert announced to Lady Ellersby
his intention of leaving Restormel, and
paid her the usual compliment of thanks for
the honour she had done him in inviting him
there.

"You have lost your queen," cried Mr.
Foley, addressing Lady Hamlet Vernon,
"now in two moves I will give you checkmate,
lady fair. But see--what is the matter?--she
is ill--she faints--lend assistance
for heaven's sake!" Lord Albert flew towards
the spot, and caught Lady Hamlet as
she was falling to the ground. The usual
remedies were applied; and when sufficiently
recovered, the sufferer was carried to her
room, apparently still unable to speak.

"I hate all scene-makers," said Lady
Boileau; "if there is a thing I cannot bear, it
is the getting up of a sentimental catastrophe.--Don't
you, Mr. Leslie Winyard?--Don't you
think it is the acmé of bad taste?"

"Oh! most undoubtedly; nothing argues
a decided _roturièrism_ more than allowing
your feelings, if _real_, to get the better of you
in public; and if feigned, nothing is so easily
seen through as counterfeiting them, therefore,
either way, it is at best a _mistake_."

"One don't look well when one faints--that
is to say, _really_ faints," observed Lady
Ellersby; "it is surely best to avoid doing so."

"One may always command one's-self,"
observed Lady Baskerville.

"Oh!" said Lady Tilney, who now and
then really thought and felt right, "it is very
easy to distinguish between a _feint_ and a
_faint_; and I believe every body would ridicule
the first, and nobody would like to do
the latter; because, as Lady Ellersby observes,
no real fainting, or crying, or any of the convulsions
produced by the feelings, are the
least graceful, except in the _beau ideal_ of a
Magdalen, or on a painter's easel; and secondly,
because nothing is less likely to produce
interest than these kind of physical
causes; for, as some great author says, 'all
physical sufferings are soon forgotten even
by the sufferer, when they are past, and by
our friends certainly never remembered beyond
their immediate duration, if so long;'
consequently I believe Lady Hamlet Vernon
did faint _tout bonnement_: she had probably
_une indigestion_; poor Lady!--but she will
soon be well again."

"Spoken like an orator," said Mr. Spencer
Newcombe; "and not only an orator, but a
philosopher."

"Par drivers moyens on arrive à pareille
fin," said the Comtesse Leinsengen; "and
providing one does what one wants to do,
that is all that _sinifies_. One person faints,
another talks, another dresses, another writes,
all in order to get what they wish. On the
success depends the wisdom of the measure."

"Agreed," cried Mr. Spencer Newcombe,
"and conceived like a _diplomate du premier
grade_," he whispered to Lady Baskerville;
then aloud, "if Tonnerre had been here he
would have said--"

"I will bet you ten to one," cried Mr.
Leslie Winyard, "that Lord Albert D'Esterre
does not leave Restormel to-morrow."

"Done," said Mr. Spencer Newcombe.--

"Done," said Lord Baskerville; "ten to
one he does; for I never knew a more obstinate
fellow in my life; one who prizes himself
more _on decision of character_--and when
he says he will do a thing he will do it, however
little he may like the thing when done."

"I don't think he will go," said Lady Ellersby,
gently.

"Why not?" asked Lady Tilney.

"Lady Hamlet Vernon will not let him."

"C'est tout simple," rejoined Comtesse
Leinsengen, with a shrug of her shoulders.

"It appears to me," said Lady Baskerville,
"that if he does go he will not be very
much missed. I never knew so dull a member
of society; he never speaks but to lay down
the law, or to inculcate some moral truth:
now really when one has done with the nursery,
that is rather too bad."

"Providing she don't drive away George
Foley," said Lady Boileau, "she may reap
the fruits of her fainting here."

"Mr. Foley," replied Lady Baskerville to
her dear friend, "is the man in the world
who will do whatever suits him best; and I
particularly admire _his_ manner and his ways:
they are all perfectly in good taste; and I
have already promised him that he shall be
my _cavaliere servente_ for the season."

"Promised!--well, dear Lady Baskerville,
I thought you were too prudent to make such
promises. What will Lord Baskerville say?"
lowering her tone to a whisper.

Lady Baskerville, speaking aloud--"Oh,
dear! la! I should never have thought of
asking him what he likes upon such an occasion;--we
live too well together to trouble
each other with our little arrangements.--Is
it not true, Lord Baskerville? do we not do
exactly as we choose?"

"I hope your Ladyship does," he replied,
in all the airs of his exclusive character; "I
should conceive myself vastly unhappy if you
did not?" Lady Baskerville looked significantly
at her dear friend Lady Boileau; who
knew, as well as herself, that this ultra-liberalism
of her Lord in regard to the conduct
of wives, whatever it might be in respect to
husbands, was entirely assumed on Lord Baskerville's
part.

While this conversation passed in the drawing-room,
Lord Albert and Mr. Foley were
discoursing in their apartment above-stairs.
They had each expressed great interest about
Lady Hamlet Vernon's indisposition; and
after waiting some time to hear accounts of
her from her female attendants, they fell into
other conversation of various kinds, during
which Lord Albert D'Esterre found himself
unfeignedly amused and interested with the
talents, taste, and refinement of Mr. Foley;
and the more so, as he spoke much of
Dunmelraise and its inhabitants, and was
lavish in his praise of Lady Adeline.

"There is only one point," he said, "which
however is hardly worth mentioning, for of
course it only arises out of the seclusion and
the monotony of her present existence; but
certainly Lady Adeline, _pour trancher le mot_,
is a _little_ methodistical--the sooner you go
and put that matter to rights the better."
Lord Albert's manner of receiving the latter
part of this information, proved to Mr. Foley
that he had mistaken the character of the
person he addressed, and he added,

"But indeed Lady Adeline Seymour is so
perfect, that it matters very little what she
does--every thing _she does_ must be right."--The
conversation then took another turn,
and they parted.

Lord Albert D'Esterre was not what might
be called a jealous man; but no man, no
human being can be without the possibility
of feeling jealousy--neither was he naturally
suspicious, but nothing is more apt to generate
a suspicion of the fidelity of another's
conduct, than the consciousness of any
breach in the integrity of our own. He
pressed his hand to his heart--he sat down--rose
up--paced his chamber, and still repeated
to himself the praises which Mr. Foley
had uttered of _his_ Adeline. "_My_ Adeline,"
he said, and then again stopped; "but is
she _mine_? do I deserve she should still be
_mine_, when I have so neglected her? no!"--His
servant came into the room with a note,
the well known shape and colour of which
he could not mistake. It was placed in his
hand--he opened it carelessly and was about
to cast it away, when the name of _Adeline_
caught his eye; then he hastily read the
following words.

"It is not for myself I mourn--it is not
the threatened loss of your society, however
much I value it, which has occasioned my
being so overpowered--it is the knowledge of
a secret which pertains to another, and in
which your fate is involved, that has quite
mastered me--this much I must tell you. I
must see you before you go, I must prepare
you for your meeting with Lady Adeline
Seymour." Twenty times he read over this
note. "What can it mean? can its meaning
be that Adeline loves Mr. Foley, at least that
he thinks so? and I, what have I been doing?
into what a sea of troubles have I plunged
for the enjoyment of the society of a person
that in fact affords me none--for the empty
speculation of recalling the chaotic mind of
one (comparatively a stranger to me) to a
sense of reason and religion, fool that I was
for the attempt." Then, after a considerable
pause, and after deep reflection, he burst
forth:

"Prepare _me_ for a meeting with Adeline!"
as his eye caught again the last line of the
note. "_Prepare me for a meeting with
Adeline_--I cannot bear the phrase; but I
must know what she means--I must drag this
secret from her:"--and he rang the bell
violently!--"I shall not want my horses
till one o'clock instead of seven to-morrow
morning."

The night Lord Albert passed was one of
feverish anxiety. He sent to inquire for Lady
Hamlet Vernon at an early hour the next
day; and hearing she was much recovered,
he besought her to grant the interview she
had done him the favour to offer as soon as
she possibly could. She replied, that in that
house it would be reckoned a breach of all
decorum, if she received him at any undue
hour; but that as soon as the earliest part of
the company breakfasted, which was about
one o'clock, she would be sure, notwithstanding
her indisposition, to be in the breakfast-room
at that time; when she would avail
herself of some opportunity to give him the
information which had come to her knowledge.
This short delay seemed an age to
him. Every one knows, when suspense
agitates the mind, what a total anarchy
ensues, and the hours which intervened
before meeting Lady Hamlet Vernon seemed
to Lord Albert interminable. When they
_did_ meet, the intervening moments ere an
opportunity occurred of Lord Albert's drawing
her aside, appeared in their turn so many
more ages of suffering.

At last the company rose from the breakfast
table, and as Lady Hamlet took Lord Albert's
arm, and walked out on the terrace under the
window, she said, "This is kind of you to
have listened to my request:" and then as
they walked from the house, proceeded in a
graver tone to add, "I am aware, dear Lord
Albert, that my note of last night must have
surprised you, and that the subject connected
with it, on which I am about to touch, is one
of the utmost delicacy, and one which upon
the very verge of the attempt I shrink from;
but you have evinced so much real interest in
the state of my wayward mind, and have
said so much to me with a view, I am certain,
of placing my happiness on a more secure
and steady foundation than I had ever
any chance of before, that I should be ungrateful
in the extreme, if a corresponding
wish for your comfort in life did not in turn
actuate me. I cannot be ignorant of the engagement
between yourself and Lady Adeline
Seymour, the fulfilment of which will not, I
presume, be long delayed; unless, indeed--"

Here Lady Hamlet Vernon's voice faltered,
and for a moment she paused; but, as if
making an effort to subdue her emotion, she
added in a lower and firmer tone, and with
an expression of something like intreaty in
her countenance as she looked up at Lord
Albert, "Unless I, dear Lord Albert, shall
prove the happy instrument of saving you from
too precipitate a step in this matter. May I
continue to speak to you thus unreservedly?"
Lord Albert made no answer, but bowed his
head in token of assent, while he walked by
her side like one lost in a perturbed dream.
She continued,

"I wished, before you went, for this opportunity,
because I was aware that it was the
only one left in which what I am about to
impart would ever be of use; for, lovely as
Lady Adeline is, possessed of charms of person
which would indeed draw any heart towards
her, of the warmest and most enthusiastic
disposition, deeply enamoured of _you_ as
well as sacredly alive to her engagement to you
(and I know her, from a source which cannot
mislead me, in person, in mind, in heart, and
in determination, to be all that I describe
to you)--how could even your judgment,
Lord Albert, which is stronger than many
of twice your years, but yield to such
united influence, and be tempted to decide at
the moment on making so much perfection
irrevocably your own. But with all these
transcendant charms of person and of character,
Lady Adeline, I am grieved to say,
and know, has been unhappily betrayed into
views of life and of the world, which must
unfit her to be the partner of any one who
does not think in accordance with her on
these subjects. From what cause or under
what influence the peculiar turn of mind she has
taken has arisen, I know not, but (and again
I must repeat, that I _know_ the too-sure truth
of all I say) it has been gradually and fearfully
on the increase, and is now become a
fixed principle with her.

"She loves _you_, as I have said, and she
looks upon the coming union with you as
the fulfilment of a sacred engagement, and
a duty she has to perform; but with this
she views the rank you hold in society,
and in which she will be associated,
only imposing on herself obligations of a
higher and severer order, and calling for a
stricter conduct and a greater self-denial on
her part. She condemns what she calls the
dissipations and wicked employment of time,
in the world of fashion; she holds dress, beyond
the plainest attire, to be a misapplication
of the gifts of fortune; she laments over the
worldly career of any one whom she hears
talked of with applause, or whose talents raise
them to distinction in the public eye: she
has even, I understand, wholly abandoned
her music and her drawing, as too alluring
and dangerous an occupation, wasting the
time which ought to be devoted to serious
reading, and an acquirement of that spirit
which has already cast such a gloom over her
existence. The only active employment in
which she indulges herself beyond her books,
is in making clothes for and visiting the poor
in her mother's domain. In short, she is what
the world calls a methodist, a saint; I know
not exactly what these words mean, but I know
they are terms applied by people of sense to
an ultraism in religious matters."

Lord Albert shuddered, and a sigh was the
only interruption he gave, as Lady Hamlet
proceeded.

"Conceive yourself, my dear Lord Albert,
united to a person of this character, however
amiable in herself, with your talents, with your
views, which are" (and she looked at him steadily
as she spoke) "tinctured with ambition.
With your temper and your tastes for the elegancies
of life, how would you brook a wife
who was praying and singing psalms all day
long? who would consider all _your_ actions,
when not in accordance with her own, as so
many positive sins, and whose moments, such
at least as were spared from the offices of her
enthusiasm, would be passed in the cottages
of your tenants, and in making baby-linen for
every expected increase in their families.

"Now let me beseech you, and believe me
to speak from the most disinterested feelings,
that when you meet Lady Adeline, you will
not betray yourself into a too hasty arrangement
for your union. See her--see her, by
all means. Judge for yourself; use your
own eyes, hear with your own ears, and
be the arbiter of your own cause, but do
nothing rashly. Time is necessary for all decisions
in momentous questions; and what
can be more momentous, and in what is there
more at stake, than in an union for life? Can
too much deliberation be given to the subject?
Alas! I know, from my own fatal experience,
what misery must ensue where no tastes, no
principles, no objects exist in common between
those united. I owe to this cause a great
portion of my present unhappiness; for the
misery I endured, and the constant efforts I
made to bear up against the tenfold wretchedness
of my marriage with Lord Hamlet Vernon,
impaired my intellectual powers, and
prevented my turning the energies of my mind
to any useful or profitable purpose. Hence I
have become what I am, dependant on the resources
of the hour, to enable me to pass
through life with any thing like composure."

Lord Albert had listened with feelings
which it would be impossible to describe
to all that had fallen from Lady Hamlet
Vernon; and in the emotion, which her communication
and her entreaties produced, he
could find no words for utterance, no answer
to her appeals. He was like one dumb, and
deprived of sense; and he stood for some moments
rooted to the spot when the voice of
his counsellor had ceased.

"See her! yes, I will see my Adeline," he
at length said in a deep agonized tone, as
if communing with himself. "Yes, I will
see her."

"Lord Albert, I entreat you, I implore
you," cried Lady Hamlet Vernon, with an
emotion that made her words quiver on her
lips, "I beseech you forgive me, if"--the
window of the library was at this moment
thrown hastily up; and Lord Albert D'Esterre
heard his name called by Lord Ellersby,
who held in his hand a letter.

"D'Esterre," said he, "here are your letters."
Lord Albert hastened forward mechanically
to receive them, and one he gazed
upon more intently than the rest, as he looked
them over--it was from Adeline.

Who is there who has not recognised, even
in its peculiar folding, the letter of a beloved
object? and whose heart has not throbbed
with delight ere even the seal were broken?
Such was the emotion of Lord Albert, awoke
up from the paralyzing influence of Lady
Hamlet Vernon's communication to new life
by the letter he now pressed to his bosom;
and regardless of what had passed, he hastened
to his room, and read as follows:--

/#
"DEAREST:--My mother has been gradually
growing worse and worse these two
months, and I have persuaded her to go to
town for a consultation of her physicians.

"It is so long since I have heard from you,
Albert, it is painful for me to write, scarcely
knowing how far you may be interested
in what I have to communicate--but
I try to still my uneasiness--let me but
see you, dear Albert, all will be forgotten,
all will be forgiven; for I am your own true
and affectionate

/*[5]
"ADELINE."
*/

"P.S. You will find us at Mamma's house
in town."
#/

A letter like this, breathing such trust and
love, and so replete with genuine expression
of delight in the prospect of meeting him,
was indeed sufficient to make Lord Albert
forget at once the poisonous theme which
his ears rather than his reason had imbibed in
his interview with Lady Hamlet. Impelled
more by the eager anxiety of affection to
behold the object of his late disquietude, than
to see her for the purpose of convincing himself
of her errors, he leapt with alacrity into
his carriage, and drove towards London,
without casting a thought on those he left
behind.

The mortification which Lady Hamlet
Vernon felt was severe, in proportion as
from its nature it admitted of no sympathy.
She was, of course, ignorant of the cause of
Lord Albert's destination being so suddenly
changed from Wales to London; but in the
blindness of her increasing passion, she resolved
in the first moment of her despair to
follow him thither. A cooler judgment, however,
made her recollect that if she lost Lord
Albert she had other friends to retain, a position
in the gay world to lose, and that, at all
events, it was not by pursuing him at that
moment that any thing was to be gained; she
therefore determined on remaining some days
at Restormel, and making herself as agreeable
as possible to the party that continued
there. To one of Lady Hamlet Vernon's disposition
this was no easy task. Violent and
impetuous as she was by nature, left as she
had been without any control, it was a very
Herculean work to hide all the warring passions
of jealousy and disappointed love beneath
the semblance of a cool indifference--a
disengaged mind.

"What have you done with Lord Albert?"
was Lady Baskerville's first question to her
after the morning's salutation; "I hear he
departed in violent haste at an undue hour this
morning. He looks of such an imperturbable
gravity, one does not understand his ever
being brought to do any thing out of measure
or rule."

"I done with Lord Albert? my dear Lady
Baskerville, you confer too much honour upon
me to suppose that _I_ have any influence with
him. I did not even know that he was gone;
but if you are very much interested in his
departure, perhaps Lord Ellersby can tell us
something about it."

She thought by this means to discover the
cause of his sudden disappearance, and gratify
her inquiries as being the curiosity of
another.--"Lord Ellersby," she said, "Lady
Baskerville is desirous to learn what wonderful
event can have called Lord Albert away
from us so very suddenly."

"I do not know," said Lord Ellersby, "unless
he is going to be prime minister; don't
you think, Winyard, he has the dignity of
office on his brows already?"

"In his own opinion, I make no doubt, he
stands a fair chance for the highest situations;
but we have quite exploded all that sort of
fudge now-a-days, and I think, unless we were
to have a bare-bone parliament, and a cabinet
of puritans, his very consequential lordship has
not much prospect of success in that line."

"No," said Lady Tenderden, taking up a
newspaper, "I think this paragraph in the
Morning Post will rather explain the secret
of Lord Albert's going away:--

/#
"'We understand Lady Dunmelraise, with
her beautiful daughter Lady Adeline Seymour,
is shortly expected in town, and are sorry
to add that Lady Dunmelraise's ill health
has hitherto caused her absence from the gay
circles of fashion.'--This is put in by herself,
or some of her friends, you may depend
upon it."
#/

"Dear," said Lady Baskerville, "those vulgar
newspapers are always filled with trash of
that sort; nobody attends to such nonsense. I
dare say this Lady Adeline is some awkward
raw girl, enough to make one shiver to
think of; however, she may do very well as
a wife for Lord Albert, and he may be gone
to meet her."

"Oh, I do assure you," cried Lady Tilney,
"that the public papers are the vehicles of a
great deal of good or evil; and that not only
political discussion, but the discussion also of
the affairs of individuals, is constantly promoted
by the freedom of the press."

"For my part," said Lady Baskerville, "I
think it is quite abominable that those vulgar
editors of newspapers should be allowed to
comment upon what we do."

"Not at all, my dear Lady Baskerville;
allow me to assure you that we are much
more known--much more distinguished--much
more _répandus_ by being all named occasionally,
never mind how or in what manner,
in the public papers. Besides, on the
freedom of the press hangs all the law and the
prophets; and if some few suffer by it occasionally,
the multitude are gainers; and I can
never repine at the glorious spirit of public
liberty which the papers and the press maintain.
Don't you agree with me, Lord Ellersby?"

"I like it all very well when it does not
interfere with me," he replied, yawning; "but
I think it is very disagreeable when these vulgar
fellows, the news-writers, say some impertinent
thing, for which I cannot give them
a rap over the knuckles."

"La, what does it signify," rejoined Lady
Ellersby; "nobody thinks of any thing above
a very few days, and except some dear friend
or other, no person of good breeding mentions
the subject to one, if it be disagreeable,
so that I cannot really say it disturbs
my tranquillity for a moment, let them
say what they will. As to this puff about
Lady Adeline Seymour, I agree with Lady
Baskerville, there are always a set of would-be
fashionables, who pay for the putting in of
such paragraphs about themselves, _et l'on sait
parfaitement à quoi s'en tenir_ respecting them."

"Nevertheless," rejoined Mr. Foley, who
had just laid down his book, "I do assure you
that, puff or no puff, Lady Adeline Seymour
will astonish you all, for she is a very extraordinary
person."

"Then I am sure I shall not be able to
suffer her," said Lady Baskerville.

"_Je déteste les phénomènes_," said Comtesse
Leinsengen.

"Mr. Foley seems to be paid too," rejoined
Lady Tenderden, laughing, "for making the
young lady notorious; and we shall see him
with a placard stuck on his shoulders, setting
forth the beauties and perfections of the wonderful
young lady."

"These _miracles_," cried Comtesse Leinsengen,
"are only fit to be shewn for half-a-crown
a piece; if you interest yourself very much in
her benefit, remember, I promise to take
tickets."

Mr. Foley smiled as, he replied: "I shall
leave it to time to prove to every one of you
how very much you are mistaken."

"By all that is romantic," cried Mr. Winyard,
"Foley is caught at last; he is positively
going to become a lackadaisical swain,
and write sonnets to his mistress's eyebrows."

"Perhaps even so. It is amusing to take
up a new character now and then; it is like
changing the air, and is equally beneficial to
the health, moral and physical. Nothing so
fatiguing as being always the same, both for
the sake of one's-self, as well as of our associates--don't
you think so, Mr. Winyard?"

"I have always shewn that I did so think.
Few persons have acted up to their principles
in this respect more conscientiously than myself."
Mr. Foley did not press this matter
further; he knew when to retire from the
field, and always cautiously avoided a defeat.
This conversation was at once a key to Lady
Hamlet Vernon, and much as it pleased her
to have discovered the truth, she resolved to
carry on the deception; but Lady Hamlet
Vernon felt that her total silence might be
construed into an interest which, however real,
she by no means wished should appear to exist
in its true colours, and therefore she forced
herself into saying, with apparent indifference,
"I understand Lord Albert D'Esterre's marriage
is shortly to take place; and whatever
people may do _after_ marriage, they must be a
little attentive _beforehand_; so I doubt not
that the arrival of Lady Dunmelraise in town
is really the cause which has deprived us of his
society; and you know I am one of those who
hazard a favourable opinion of Lord Albert,
notwithstanding Lady Baskerville's dissentient
voice."

This speech she conceived to be one of unprejudiced
tone and feeling that would lull all
suspicion to rest, had any existed, as to the
nature of her real sentiments; and it at least
prevented the expression of that ridicule,
which would otherwise have been her portion.
In this society there was a general system of
deceiving on the one hand, and detecting on
the other, which constituted its chief entertainment
and business; and in the present
instance it formed, as usual, one of the main
springs of the interest that filled up the
remaining hours spent by the party at Restormel.




CHAPTER II.

THE BRIDE'S RETURN.


The approaching gaieties of London, after
Easter, were pronounced likely to be of a
more brilliant description than they had been
for years, as is always the case, according to
the interests and wishes of the persons who
raise the report. One of the earliest arrivals
in the scene of _ton_ was that of the Glenmores,
who had returned from Paris, whither they
had proceeded, it will be remembered, shortly
after their marriage.

London, however, was still empty; a considerable
part of the _élite_ remained at Restormel,
and others of their corps were not yet
reunited; while such as had in fact nothing
to do with them, were nevertheless sufficiently
foolish to regulate their movements by those
of the exclusives.

It was in this interval between the two
assignable points of a London season that
Lord Glenmore, turning the corner into the
still deserted region of Hyde Park, met there,
to his surprise, Lord Albert D'Esterre, who
sat his horse like one careless of what was
passing around him, and seemingly so absorbed
in his own thoughts, that the exercise
of riding had the appearance at that moment
with him of a mechanical habit, rather than
a thing of choice. So deeply occupied was he
in reflection, that Lord Glenmore was obliged
to call several times, and at length to ride
close up to him, before he could attract his
attention.

"D'Esterre," said he, as he held out his
hand, "I rejoice to meet you; and this unexpected
pleasure is the greater, as I thought
you had been too fashionable a man to be yet
in London, at least for a day or two to come.
But how ill you look! what is the matter
with you?"

Lord Albert was not in a mood to bear
interruption from any one, or exactly able,
without putting a force upon himself, to meet
any inquiry with a courteous answer. But
Lord Glenmore was, perhaps, one of the
very few exceptions in whose favour something
of this feeling was abated, for their
intimacy had been of long standing; and Lord
Albert's regard and respect for his character
was, as it deserved to be, of the highest
kind.

As soon, therefore, as the latter was roused
from his reverie by the kindly voice of his
friend, he greeted him with answering
warmth, and inquired after Lady Glenmore
with that cordial interest which he felt for
the wife of his friend; he at the same time
endeavoured to laugh off Lord Glenmore's
observations on his own personal appearance,
which were nevertheless well-founded--for
his mind was labouring under an anxiety
which visibly displayed itself in his countenance,
and which, as his first emotion of
pleasure in the near prospect of meeting
Lady Adeline subsided, the mysterious words
of Lady Hamlet Vernon's note were too well
calculated to give rise to. This state of uneasiness
was by no means diminished by the
delay of Lady Dunmelraise's arrival in town.
At her house Lord Albert's hourly inquiries
had for two days been fruitless; and he was
returning from South Audley Street, with
the expression of increased disappointment
painted in his looks, when he met Lord
Glenmore.

After some conversation of a general nature,
and inquiries into the events which had
arisen in the fashionable world during his
absence, and which the latter confessed himself
to have been too happy to have thought
about before, he asked Lord D'Esterre, with
a manner implying more interest, what were
his own views and intentions.

"I hope you are not thinking of returning
abroad," he added, "for we want you at
home, and then you must marry." Lord
Albert sighed as his friend approached the
subject so near his heart, but which he was
little inclined to discuss with him at that particular
moment; while the other, without
remarking the grave expression that had
returned over Lord Albert's countenance,
continued:--

"Allow me to speak to you as a man who
has lived a little longer in the world than
yourself, and to whom you formerly communicated
what were your views and wishes in
life. You told me you would aim at diplomacy
and at office; I am sure in both from
noble motives, and because you felt it to be
your bias, which in all our pursuits is half
the battle in ensuring success. Now you must
permit me to tell you that, however great or
powerful in point of interest a man may be,
he can never with these objects be too much
of the latter. Above all things, then, keep
this principle before you; and, in any alliance
that you may form (for you will marry soon,
depend upon it: the ladies, if there were no
fears from yourself, will not allow you to remain
long in single blessedness), endeavour
to remember my advice, and look round you
before you take the leap which is to break
the neck of your liberty, and do not throw
away the advantages which your situation (to
say nothing of yourself) give you of selecting
where you choose, and where you think your
pursuits will best be promoted.

"Now there is one, _par parenthèse_, among
the many desirable parties I could name
to you--which is Osbaldeston's daughter.
His interest is great; but he has taken
through life the most foolish of all parts
in politics--that of being of neither party;
and, as an independent peer, is alternately
hated and caressed, abused and praised,
despised and sought after by both. You
know, since the death of his eldest son,
all his affections centre in this daughter;
and I am persuaded that any one united to
her, may make all Lord Osbaldeston's interests
his own. I do not mean to force this
match upon you," smiling as he spoke; "but
I allude to it as a sample of what, as your
friend, and one thinking with you in politics,
and pretty much the same in all other matters,
and having your interest, my dear D'Esterre,
much at heart, I would rejoice to see you
assent to. _Enfin_--the Osbaldestons dine with
us to-day, and if you will join us, you will
have an opportunity of judging for yourself."

Lord Albert, as if he thought himself
doomed to undergo violence on all sides in
regard to Lady Adeline, replied with more
petulance in the tone of his voice than he
was ever known to give way to--

"My dear friend, you forget that I am an
engaged man."

"Oh, if you mean to allude to Lady
Adeline Seymour, I had understood that it
was only that sort of engagement which
might be dissolved or not, as the parties
chose when they came to years of discretion;
and as I had heard it whispered that
Lady Adeline was attached to a young man
who was much at Dunmelraise, and a _protégé_
of her mother's, a certain Mr. George Foley,
who turned all the women's heads about two
years ago in London (Lady Hamlet Vernon's
among the rest, by the way), I could not suppose,
seeing you very quietly here, that your
heart was much engaged; and I thought I
knew you too well to believe that you would
ever marry (however much I hope you will
make a prudent alliance) where love and
esteem do not constitute a part of the compact."

"My dear Glenmore, I see your kind intention,
through this apparent carelessness
of my feelings; but allow me to assure you,
you are misinformed--a purer, truer, or more
innocent creature does not exist than Lady
Adeline Seymour; and though I have been
separated lately from her, yet from my correspondence
with herself, and from the invariable
accounts I have received from others, I feel
assured that the ingenuousness of her character
would never allow her to have a
thought concealed from her mother or myself
in the momentous question between us. Oh
no; when I look back to her every letter, the
recollection brings conviction along with it
of her heart being unchanged."

Lord Albert spoke with an inward agitation
which corresponded little with the confidence
which his words expressed. His outward appearance,
however, was calm; and Lord Glenmore,
supposing he had been led into a very
pardonable error, and wholly innocent of intentionally
wounding his friend's feelings,
proceeded--

"Well, if it is thus, D'Esterre, you are
already a married man, I conceive; but be it
so, that does not prevent your dining with me
to-day--pray come."

Lord Albert declined, saying gravely, "no!
that cannot be; for I am in hourly expectation
of Lady Adeline's arrival with her mother,
who, I am sorry to add, comes to town on
account of her health." A momentary pause
ensued in the conversation; and Lord Albert,
seemingly little inclined to renew the last
topic or enter upon any new one, seized the
opportunity of bidding his companion farewell,
and they separated.

From the somewhat cold and reserved manner
of his parting, Lord Glenmore, when
alone, began to think he had committed a
mistake in treating his friend's engagement
with Lady Adeline lightly, and condemned
himself for what had escaped him on the subject.
For Lord Glenmore was a man of honourable,
as well as kindly feelings; and in giving
the counsel of a _prudential_ marriage to Lord
Albert, was at the same time the last person
to think that, in an union for life, happiness
ought to be sacrificed to interested views:
the furthest also from his thoughts would have
been any design to interfere between, or to
disunite any two persons who were attached
to each other. Perhaps the world in general
might not have given him credit for this amiability
of feeling, or for the strict principle
which he really possessed, from seeing that he
lived in constant intercourse with a class,
where, if similar worth of character did exist
at all, it certainly never was looked up to as a
merit in the possessor. It must be allowed
that Lord Glenmore was any thing rather than
a fitting member of such a class; for in addition
to warmth of heart, natural affection, and
good principles, he possessed talents of a very
superior kind, and held opinions quite at
variance with the received creed of his companions.

He believed, for instance, that life was given
for other purposes than to be spent in accident
alone, or that a perpetual course of frivolous
pursuits, without any higher aim or object,
should be suffered to govern human existence;
but that, on the contrary, every action should
tend to some useful purpose. If Lord Glenmore
was ambitious (and he was so), his
ambition was of a noble kind; and while he
sought power, his uprightness of character
could never suffer him to abuse its exercise.
He was called proud by some: but although
impressed with a sense of the dignity of the
aristocracy to which he belonged, it was not
a blind and foolish estimate of rank which
made him value it, but a conviction of the
importance and responsibility which every one
placed in the higher grades of society possesses,
while fulfilling the duties of the sphere
in which Providence places him; and if in
society he sometimes appeared reserved, and
joined not in all the empty, uninteresting topics
that make up the conversation of most of the
coteries of _ton_, it was--that his mind was
filled, even in the buzz of the vapid talk
around him, with matters worthy of the reflection
and study of an intellectual being.

He owed his admission, consequently,
within the line of circumvallation drawn
by the _ultra_ leaders of fashion, to a dread of
the important consequence of his remaining
aloof from their circle, and the preponderating
influence which even his neutrality would afford
(for Lord Glenmore was not a man to lend
himself to either side in such a frivolous warfare
as the decision of who were, or who
were not, worthy members of the _corps élite_).
Although the exclusives, therefore, one and
all, considered him to fall short of a due proportion
of that species of merit necessary to
their order, yet still they united in one common
effort to retain him on their side. They
could have wished him, no doubt, allied to
one of their own peculiar choosing, and had
heard with dismay proportionate to the consequences
which might frustrate their plans
respecting him, the announcement of his
marriage with his present wife.

Determined, however, to make the best
of the unpropitious event, they had from
the first decided on the general policy of
endeavouring to retain Lord Glenmore's influence,
by admitting Lady Glenmore (however
much she might be considered inadmissible)
amongst them; and thus to secure
in the opinion of the world the sanction of
her husband to live on terms of intimacy in
their set.

It was this motive which in some degree
influenced the ladies who were present at
Lady Melcomb's ball, and subsequently at the
marriage, to risk the loss of _caste_ by being
seen in the motley collection of that lady's
assembly: though the ties of relationship, in
one or two instances, would have led them to
the re-union on such a happy occasion. Yet
with Lady Ellersby and Lady Tenderden these
were impulses, which were only to be acted
upon when the laws and dogmas of exclusiveness
permitted such a proceeding.

When Lord Glenmore returned from the
Continent with his young bride, the news of
his arrival quickly spread through the exclusive
circle, and called for some decisive measure
on their part, to ascertain how he might
be induced still to remain, under the circumstances
of his new connexion, in the same degree
of intimacy with them. It was therefore
time, on the part of the exclusives, for bringing
to bear these intentions at the moment
of their re-assembling in London, and more
particularly on that of the individuals who
composed the party at Restormel.

Lady Tilney, whose activity was ever on
the alert, ordered her carriage before the
morning show of London began, that she
might catch all the chiefs of her party at
home. The first house she visited was Lady
Ellersby's, who was not yet risen, but she was
admitted to her bed-side.

"_Reveillez-vous belle endormie_," said Lady
Tilney, kissing her on both sides of her face,
"for what do you think I am come about?"

"I cannot imagine: has Lady Hamlet
Vernon gone off with any body, or do the
ministry totter, or has Newmarket proved
unsuccessful, or, in short, tell me what _has_
happened!"

"No, my dear, nothing of all that; but the
Glenmores are come back from Paris, and
now or never must the question be ultimately
decided whether we are to retain Lord Glenmore
amongst us or not. You know we were
agreed on the general policy of doing so soon
after his marriage, and the first step to take
will be to tutor the young Georgina, so that
she may not on the outset of her _début_ do
any thing to disgrace us. But although I considered
the matter as settled, I would not
take any decided step till I consulted you. It
is on this account I am come at so early an
hour, lest we should not have acted in concert
on this point; for as I always say, it is the
disagreement in the cabinet between their own
members which always breaks up the administration;
so society is, or ought to be, precisely
a type of the government of a state:
don't you agree with me?"

"Perfectly," replied Lady Ellersby, suppressing
a yawn, for she did not, to do her
justice, understand one word of the political
jargon in which her friend always talked, whether
the conversation ran on the choice of a
new cap or the admission of a new member
to their society. Lady Tilney observing her
dear friend's absence of mind, told her that
she looked so beautiful in her night-cap, she
quite made her forget her errand.

"But, nevertheless," (she added) "I must
remind you, that it _is_ one of no small importance,
for you see what a vast field of interests
the Glenmore himself includes. There are
the Melcombs, and the D'Esterres, and the
Osbaldestons--a perfect host. _Some_ of them
may play a card in politics: _all_ of them are
good tools, and I promised Lord Tilney not
to lose sight of that consideration. So if we
exclude la petite Glenmore, we shall be incurring
great risks; whereas, by making
her _one of us_, we shall have a vast addition of
strength added to our party, and we can always
take care that the vulgars belonging to
her, who are only good for certain uses,
shall not come in her train."

Lady Ellersby, whose attention had been
effectually awakened by the admiration of her
night-cap, now sat up in her bed and said,
"Ah! there indeed is the difficulty--how will
you manage that?"

"Nothing easier: we will, as I said, explain
to her what an advantage it is to belong
to us, and the necessity of our confining
our members to a very small circle, and then
tell her that we will always let her know whom
she is to invite to her parties, and whom she
is to go out with. Thus we shall take care
that, from the very beginning, she does not
_compromise_ us. One or other of us must
always be at her right hand, and by flattering
Lord Glenmore, and endeavouring
to make him believe that Lord Tilney is
wavering, and may possibly come round to
his side in politics, we shall easily get that
sort of power established with both, which
it is quite necessary to obtain if they are to
belong to us; and that they are so to do
is, as I have already explained to you,
equally necessary. Not that I, for the world,
would make any body do what he did not
like to do: no one is more for perfect freedom,
as you well know, than myself, but you
must feel that not to belong to us, is in fact to
be nobody, so that we are doing them a favour,
the greatest possible favour indeed; and
I am sure I would not take all this trouble
were it not that I am convinced it is doing
good."

"Oh yes, you are so good-natured, you
are always trying to oblige. And what then
would you have me to do?"

"Why I would have you call upon Lady
Glenmore to-day, and you may tell her how
she ought to dress, and to demean herself in
public. And when she is in public, you may
take care that no one speaks to her but
those whom we approve of; and should any
of her vulgar relations by any accident affect
to get near her, you can contrive to draw her
away, and carry her off to some other place.
Thus, my dear Lady Ellersby, I think, after
having explained this business so far, I need
say no more, though I could talk for hours
on the subject," Lady Ellersby yawned instinctively;
"but the line of conduct I wish
you to adopt has been so minutely pointed
out, that I think you cannot possibly misunderstand
it. And now I will go to Lady
Tenderden and the rest, and I flatter myself
no _diplomate_ ever played his part with more
skill. Depend upon it I will continue to
do my utmost endeavour to succeed in this
affair, which I feel persuaded is of considerable
consequence to our society. Not, as I
before said, that I would ever, either in great
or little matters, stoop to contrivance. I like
to persuade people for their good, and would
have all the world act with a liberal and free
exercise of their own rightful powers; the
right of reason which every individual ought
to exert and use in his own behalf. Ah, if
all governments could but be persuaded of
this, and be ruled in their determinations by
this noble motive of action, how differently
things in general would be managed from
what they are! Kings would no longer
be puppets of state, but be obliged in self-defence
to become rational people, and not to
depend on their ministers and favourites;
and ministers would not depend on each
other as they do, but every body in his own
sphere would be doing all he could to tend
to the public weal."

Lady Tilney had once again got on her
favourite theme; and on these occasions she
never found out that the one part of her
discourse generally contradicted the other,
and that her _meaning_ virtually did so where
her _words_ did not, for it was always herself
who was to be the mover and law-giver.
But this was all matter of moonshine to her
present auditress, who at length shewed
unequivocal symptoms of inattention, and
even hinted that it was time for her to rise.
So at length Lady Tilney, reiterating the part
she assigned to her respecting Lady Glenmore,
took a tender leave and departed.

Her next visit was made to Lady Tenderden.

"Ah!" she said, on meeting her, after
the first greetings, "what a relief it is
to have to converse with a rational being,
one who understands the meaning of things
in general. I have just been talking to poor
dear Lady Ellersby, who is, between ourselves,
become more than ever thick, and
indolent--she actually cannot understand any
thing _consecutively_; however, I have, I think,
at last put her in a right track upon the subject
which I must now discuss with you."

"I know," said Lady Tenderden, interrupting
her (for patience was not her _forte_)
"what you would say. The Glenmores are
arrived, and--"

"Exactly; and it is necessary we talk the
matter over, and settle precisely the _marche
du jeu_."

"Oh! by all means, take _la petite Georgina
en main, et l'affaire est faite--je m'en charge_."

"That is precisely what I wished;--nobody
is better calculated for that office. In the
multiplicity of things which I have to do,"
said Lady Tilney, "it is not possible that I
should pay that sort of attention which she
will require, for she is very childish, perfectly
ignorant of the ways of the world, almost a
simpleton, and our society might be entirely
broken up and destroyed, if we allowed her,
without proper caution being previously
observed, to come in amongst us. At the
same time, I think it is of such consequence
that we should not altogether lose Lord
Glenmore, I mean politically as well as prudentially
speaking, that it does appear to me
to be quite worth while to take the trouble
of forming that little wife of his, and making
her one of us."

"Oh, _certainement_," replied Lady Tenderden.
"Besides, Lord Glenmore is charming;
_il fera fureur_, when he becomes a little
more polished, and I shall with infinite pleasure
_consacré_ some hours to the instruction
of _la petite ladi qui seroit à ravir si elle n'avoit
pas l'air d'un mouton qui rève_."

"Exactly," cried Lady Tilney, "but that
is of no consequence."

"Oh, none in the world," responded Lady
Tenderden.

"Well then, my dear, that is finally arranged,
and I shall now only have to go to
the Glenmores to-morrow; but if it be possible,
_you_ had better see her to-day, and
above all things secure her coming to the
Ellersby's party, and Lady Hamlet Vernon's
on Sunday, and to our own party on the
water on Monday, and to the Opera with you
on Tuesday, and so on; in short, taking care
only that not one day shall be lost or misapplied."

"Depend upon me; and now then farewell,
my dear Lady Tenderden. We meet to-night?"

"Of course. _Soyez toujours séduisante
comme à present; cette capotte jaune est délicieuse;
elle vous va à ravir._"

"_Flatteuse_," rejoined Lady Tilney in a tone
of languishing satisfaction, and so they parted
mutually pleased. Lady Tenderden, true to her
promise, drove straight to Lady Glenmore's,
and found her at home. Having expressed
her satisfaction at this fortunate circumstance,
one too of such rare occurrence, she
praised every part of her dress, and inquiring
of the Paris fashions, thus proceeded: "And
now, my fair queen, you are truly an enviable
personage--_you_, if any body ever had,
have really _beau jeu_, every thing that can make
a woman's life truly desirable; a great establishment,
magnificent equipages, jewels,
and the consideration which attaches to a _haut
grade_ in society, a distinguished title, _tout
enfin qui peut embellir la vie_; truly, _je vous
en félicite, ma belle amie_. But you cannot
occupy so enviable a position without exciting
the most active envy. Now allow me, as
a sincere friend, to put you _au courant_ of some
things, in respect to the true nature of which
you may be deceived. There are a certain
set of persons, who will very naturally pay you
court, and endeavour to obtain your ear; such
as the Duchesse D'Hermanton, the Ladies
Proby, and Ladies How, and all that tiresome
concourse of old dowagers; but be upon your
guard against these, and without giving open
offence to any body, be sure that you get rid
of them in their very first onset."--Lady Glenmore
stared. "_Vous ouvrez des grands yeux,
ma chère_, but you will soon learn the use of
these cautions. If the people I have named
send their names, as they will certainly do or
visit you, be a long time before you return the
call; they are an old-fashioned set, who pique
themselves on politeness, and _veille cour_ attentions,
and feeling affronted by this neglect on
your part, they will not so readily or familiarly
accost you in public. When they do
(for some of them are vulgarly good-natured
enough not to take the hint)--when they do
accost you, take care to look as if you did not
know who they were, and to answer them
by monosyllables, if you answer them at all.

"Above all things, never go to their wearisome
_At Homes_; but if they attack you with
one of their downright speeches,--sorry not to
have had the honour, &c. &c.--hoping you had
received a card, &c. &c.--curtsey, and say you
were vastly sorry, but you forgot the day,
or----no no, say _mistook_ it; yes, _mistook_ it,
that is best, because it is a loop-hole that answers
for dinner as well as any other party;
yes, a mistake of the day is the best recipe I
know, for any invitation which you may
chance to hesitate about, and perhaps think
it possible you might like to accept, and
then having done so, repent of it when the
time comes--a mistake in the day sets all
right. You are _au desespoir_, and _they_ must
believe you, or make themselves appear ridiculous;
it may indeed cost you a note or two,
but that is the worst of it, and then _vous en
êtes quitte pour la vie_."

Lady Glenmore, who had been so astonished
hitherto that she could not reply, now
found herself called upon to make some answer,
as there was a pause on the part of
Lady Tenderden.

"You have told me so many things," she
said, "my dear Lady Tenderden" (smiling
as she spoke), "that I am afraid I shall never
remember the half of them, particularly as
they are upon subjects which, to tell you the
truth, do not interest me much, if at all. One
thing you said, however, that was very kind,
and kindness is not lost upon me I can assure
you, which was the cordial expression with
which you wished me joy of my happiness. I
should indeed be ungrateful if I did not feel
warmly obliged to you; only you omitted in the
catalogue of my felicities, that, without which
there would be no felicity for me--I mean
my being the wife of Lord Glenmore; who,
had he not possessed any of the adventitious
advantages you enumerated, I should equally
have preferred to the whole world."

"Oh! _cela va sans dire_, of course such a
young and handsome husband is taken into
the account; but, my dear young friend, _vous
ne voulez pas vous donner des ridicules_, much
less render your husband the laughing-stock
of all the world, by setting yourself up with
him _en scène de Berger et Bergere_; besides,
permit me to say, that is just the way to lose
him. If you are always at his elbow, watching
him _en furet_, depend upon it he will soon
think you are jealous, and following him out
of curiosity. Now there is nothing a man can
so ill bear as the idea of being watched, particularly
by a wife; besides, all his male friends
would avoid him if they saw he had such an
Argus--for, beautiful as you are, you must not
have an hundred eyes, to spy out every thing
your husband does; no no, my dear, when
you are _en tête-à-tête_, it is all well enough, this
new-married fondness; but it will soon evaporate,
take my word for it, and then you
will be dying to break the troublesome habit
_de part et d'autre_, and will not know how to
set about it: take great care, _ma chère ladi_, to
begin as you mean to go on."

"Certainly," replied Lady Glenmore, "I
have but one meaning, one intention--that is,
to love and be loved; and I shall never, I
hope, do any thing which can run counter to
that prime business, that prime duty of my
life."

"Oh!" cried Lady Tenderden, perceiving
she had gone too far, "it is quite delightful
to hear you. You are, I am sure, destined to
be a phœnix" (sneeringly); "and proud indeed
must any woman be to view one of her
own sex so well calculated to be a glory and
honour to it. I was only warning you against
certain appearances, certain misapprehensions,
which persons of your turn of mind are
liable to fall into, and which might be the
very means of depriving you of that which
you are so anxious to retain. I know the
world, believe me, my dear young friend,
and there is nothing in it I can so ill endure to
see, as an assumption of a happiness which is
out of the common line. If you enjoy such a
superlative felicity, _tant mieux pour vous_, but
do not make an _étalage_ of it, for either its
reality will be questioned, or they will take
care it shall not long be one; whereas if you
do as other people do, you will be allowed to
go on quietly, and you may perhaps carry on
this sort of romantic view of life much longer
than persons in general do."

Lady Glenmore, who had listened with
painful earnestness to this insidious advice,
now felt her heart swell, and the tears bursting
from her eyes. "And must I really,"
she said in a voice of suffocation, "pretend
to be indifferent to my husband, in order to
retain his love?"

"Certainly, my dear child; _peut on être si
enfant_" (observing her emotion), "as to allow
yourself to be thus moved about such a trifle;
take my advice, and you will never lose that
sort of hold over his affections which it is so
charming, I allow, to possess. Shew him
that you can have other men at your feet--that
you are not, in short, dependent upon
him for any thing _faites vous un sort_, in short,
_et vous ne vous en répentirez pas_."

"And pray, how am I to set about this
sort of life?"

"Why nothing so easy; simply, go constantly
out, and take care to have one or two
young men _de la première volée_ always about
you; never be reduced to be handed out or into
any public place by Lord Glenmore; only
now and then _pour faire beau voir_, and to
shew that you have _des procédés honnêtes_
one to the other--or else _par hasard_, but
never as a thing of course. Another point
is, you must establish an apartment of your
own; for you cannot think between married
persons how necessary that is, and what an
independence it gives to both. It is so very
disagreeable to have the exact moment of
our going in and coming out commented
upon."

"Dear no, pardon me, not at all. I am always
glad when Lord Glenmore says, 'Where
have you been so long, Georgina?' because
that shews he misses me."

"Oh, of course," said Lady Tenderden, as
she always said when she did not know what
to say; and inwardly she thought what a
world of nature must here be overturned, before
any thing artificial can be sown in such a
soil! "Well, my dear Lady Glenmore, you
come to the Hamlet Vernon's to-morrow
night?"

"Yes, I believe so; that is to say, if Lord
Glenmore is disengaged."

"Now really we shall all be afraid of such
a paragon of love and obedience; or what is
worse, we shall all laugh at you if you give
_tête baissé_ into that sort of ultra propriety.
What can Lord Glenmore's engagements have
to do with your coming or not coming to
Lady Hamlet Vernon's?" Lady Glenmore
blushed, and confessed that she did not wish
to go out if Lord Glenmore did not.

"Well, my dear, I see the terrible re-action
in perspective which must succeed to all this
red-hot love; and it is mighty well for the
moment; only you are laying up, _croyez moi_,
a store of discontent and dissatisfaction for
yourself."

At this moment a servant entered, and laid
a visiting card on the table. "Oh, Mr. Leslie
Winyard," said Lady Tenderden, taking it up,
"a vastly agreeable creature: you will let
him in of course."

"No," answered Lady Glenmore, "the
only thing Lord Glenmore does not wish me
to do, as a young married woman, is to receive
young men as morning visitors, and I
have no wish to disobey him; therefore Mr.
Leslie Winyard has been included in the general
order I gave to that effect."

"_Je tombe de mon haut_; well, certainly, I
never should have guessed that Lord Glenmore,
that handsome, young, gay Lothario,
would have turned out such a tyrant; and to
commence before the honey-moon be well
nigh over to shew the cloven-foot of _husbandism_,
is really putting a seal to that tyranny
with a vengeance! And he--he too, of _all persons_,
to pretend--but I believe that is always
the way, these men _à bonnes fortunes_ do always
make the most insufferable husbands."

"I am sure," replied Lady Glenmore, with
an air of offended dignity which astonished
Lady Tenderden, "I am sure Lord Glenmore
desires nothing of me but what he conceives
is for my own happiness; and I am perfectly
willing to obey him in every thing, far less
in such a matter of indifference as this."
Her cheeks here grew redder and redder during
every word of Lady Tenderden's insidious
speech. The melancholy, uneasy expression,
nevertheless, which in despite of herself
threw a cast of restless inquiry into her countenance,
as though she would have asked "to
what do you allude?" did not pass unobserved
by Lady Tenderden, and she conceived it to
be a good time to let the poison work which
she had thus insidiously distilled; so she arose
to take her leave, and with apparent carelessness
said, "_Au reste_, remember," and she
spoke in a soothing tone of commiseration,
as if she wished, were it possible, to have
withdrawn, or at least to soften the words she
had uttered, "remember, Lord Glenmore is
not a bit worse than other men, they are all
alike; and really I think him singularly agreeable,
so do not let any thing I have said give
you a moment's uneasiness."

She knew the rankling arrow was in Lady
Glenmore's heart. "You have nothing to do
but to take your own way, and keep it well
in mind that all husbands take theirs, and
my word for it, if you only follow this counsel,
you will live _en Tourtereaux_, and lead a very
happy life."

"I have no doubt I shall do that," said
Lady Glenmore, half-crying.

"Believe me, _cher enfant_, whenever you
feel the least melancholy or uneasy, send for
me, and I shall put all to rights for you in a
moment; you are a delightful, an unique
creature; I really love you, and him too; you
know, he was my play-fellow when we were
children, therefore I take a particular interest
in you both, and am alike the friend of each.
Come, dry these beauteous eyes, whose brightness
ought not to be dimmed by a tear; come,
take a drive with me in the Park." Lady
Glenmore hesitated as she replied:

"I expect Lord Glenmore every moment;
he promised to drive me in his phaeton. He
was to have been here an hour ago" (looking
anxiously at the clock).

"Well, then, if he is an hour after his
appointment, you would not surely wait for
him any longer? Depend upon it he has been
engaged by some business, or it may be love
of virtù or politics, _que sçai-je_--come let us go
and look for him; my life for it we shall meet
him in the Park."

"Perhaps so," said the youthful Georgina
with a sigh, who evidently assented to Lady
Tenderden's proposal for no other reason than
that the hope might be realized;--and ordering
the servant who answered her bell, to
tell her maid to arrange her shawl, she followed
her _friend_ to her carriage.

When they reached the Park her eyes
wandered from one figure to another in quest
of Lord Glenmore; in vain--the admiration
of the passing throng who courted her attention
had no attraction for her, she saw
not the only object she wished to see, and
returned wearied and dispirited, notwithstanding
all Lady Tenderden's endeavours to
amuse and dissipate her thoughts. The moment
she came home, however, she had the
satisfaction of finding her husband already
there, and she scarcely waited to say adieu to
Lady Tenderden before she flew up stairs to
him. After her first greeting, he asked her
where and with whom she had been; and on
telling him, he said, "I am glad, love, that
you like Lady Tenderden, for she has a thousand
good qualities;" (_a façon de parler_ by the
way, which is often taken upon trust from
one month to another, and frequently bears
no true meaning.) Lord Glenmore continued:
"Yes, she has a thousand good qualities, and
is very clever and agreeable in her way, and
has that perfect _usage du monde_ which has
so much charm, and which besides may
be of real advantage to a young person
like yourself entering on the scene; I am
quite rejoiced that she is your friend. It is
true she sometimes overpasses that line of _retenue_
which I might like my young wife to
observe; yet she has never been charged with
any real fault, and in adopting what is best,
you can leave out such parts of her manners
and conduct as may not exactly suit your
age and taste. In short, I think she is a very
useful acquaintance, and you may safely listen
to her advice respecting your conduct in the
world; but after a little experience, my sweet
Georgina, you may make your own choice of
intimates, and I am sure that selection will
always be well and wisely made."

Lady Glenmore listened attentively to her
husband, and sighed as she recalled to mind
the nature of the advice which she had
already received; but thought, "well, then,
Lady Tenderden was right after all, and I
must not tell Glenmore. How childish and
silly I was in having been so vexed about his
not coming home this morning,--still less
must I tell him of her cautioning me against
pursuing him, for should he know that I had a
thought of doing so, it might probably produce
the effect she predicted."

With this idea thus unfortunately impressed
upon her mind by what her husband had
unthinkingly said, Lady Glenmore remained
silent. The hour of dressing now called them
to their toilette, and the subject was not at
that time renewed.




CHAPTER III.

JEALOUSY.


After Lord Albert had parted with his
friend in the Park, he returned again to Lady
Dunmelraise's house; but still in vain--they
came not. The agony of suspense, when prolonged,
is perhaps the severest which the
human mind can know; but like all chastisements
or corrections, it is never sent without
a meaning, and if entertained as it is mercifully
intended it should be, we shall reap the
fruits of the trial.

In the present case, Lord Albert's disappointment
brought back a livelier sense of
the attachment he really felt for Lady Adeline,
and awoke all those tender fears and reminiscences
which cherish love, but which a too
great security of possession had for the present
blunted, or at least laid in abeyance.
He now wondered how he could have
suffered so much time to elapse without
writing to her. He wondered, too, that he
had not heard from her; she had not then
missed the blank in his part of the correspondence;
and it was evident some other
interest had supplied that one in her heart.--He
looked at her picture, as if he could read
in that image an answer to these various
surmises; but it was placid, and serene--it
smiled as was her wont, and he felt displeased
at the senseless portrait, for an expression
which he could not have borne her to wear,
had she really known what his fears and
feelings were. He shut the case and pushed
it from him;--he felt angry--and then
ashamed--for conscience goaded him with its
sting, and in turn questioned him, as to his
right of indulging one such sensation against
_her_, whom in fact he knew he had neglected:
but all this process of mental analization
was salutary, and as he came by degrees to
know himself better, he was enabled to form
a truer estimation, not only of the amiable
person to whom he was bound by every tie
of honour, but of the true nature of real
worth.

At length, on the fourth morning from that
on which he met Lord Glenmore, he found in
North Audley Street a note from Lady Adeline.
"A note only!" he said, hastily breaking
the seal. It was written from an inn on the
road; it informed him that Lady Dunmelraise
had borne the journey very ill, which had
occasioned them to stop frequently; but that
they would reach town she hoped on the following
evening. Lord Albert turned quickly
to the date, and found that it was of the preceding
day, so that he might expect their
arrival that very evening. A gleam of delightful
anticipation now shed joy over his
heart. We easily gloss over our own faults;
and Lord Albert found all his self-reproaches
for neglect and temporary coldness merged
in the fondness he actually felt at that moment,
and his present determination to abide
by, and act upon this feeling, silenced all
self-accusation. With a beating pulse, and an emotion
he did not wish to quell, he determined
on not leaving the house till he should once
more have seen _his_ Adeline.

He seated himself, therefore, in the drawing-room,
and gave a loose to those pleasurable
sensations which now flowed in upon
him. The apartment had been prepared for
Lady Dunmelraise, and all the usual objects
in her own and her daughter's occupations
were set in their wonted places. He recognized
with transport a thousand trifling circumstances
connected with them, which
brought his love, his _own_ love, more vividly
before his eyes. As he carefully enumerated
and dwelt upon these, his eyes rested on a
vacant space in the wall near the piano-forte,
where a drawing of himself had hung; and
the enchanting thought that it had been her
companion in the country, came in aid of all
the rest to soften and gladden every sensation
of his heart. As his eyes wandered over the
apartment in quest of fresh food for delight,
they rested on a parcel of papers, and letters,
lying on the writing table. He turned them
over, hardly knowing why he did so, when a
frank from Restormel, directed to Lady Adeline
Seymour, gave him an unpleasant shock,
and he dropped it with a sudden revulsion of
sensation that was any thing but gentle.

He again resumed the letter, turned it
round and round, looked at the seal--it was a
coat of arms, but the motto, "_for life_," was
a peculiar one. He wondered to what family
it belonged; he thought of consulting some
heraldic work in order to discover, when the
sound of a heavy laden carriage passing
in the street, drew off his attention. He
flew to the window--it was a family coach,
but one glance told him it was not that
of Lady Dunmelraise. Back he came to
the letter table; again _the letter_ was before
his eyes--_the letter_, for amongst many he
saw but one.

"It is surprising," he said to himself, "that
Adeline should have a correspondent at Restormel,
and I not know of it; but shortly,
very shortly, this mystery shall be solved. I
will ask her at once--but carelessly, naturally,
who is her unknown friend at Restormel?
Ask her? no, she will of course tell
me, if she has formed any new acquaintance
with whom she is sufficiently intimate to correspond,
and if she does not of herself tell me,
I shall never _inquire_ into the matter--indeed
why should I? No, there is nothing renders
a man so silly as jealousy, or throws him so
much in a woman's power as letting her see
he is jealous."

With these, and many such contradictory
reasonings as these, did Lord Albert continue
to pace the room along and across, and every
now and then stop and fix his eyes on the
offending letter; when again a sound attracted
him to the window, and though it was dusk,
and objects were indistinctly seen at a distance,
he recognized the well-known equipage. The
next moment he was in the street; and the
next it drove up to the door. He heard Lady
Adeline's soft voice cry out, "There's Albert!"
as she half turned to her mother, and
kept kissing her hand to himself. The carriage
door was opened, and she sprang out,
receiving the pressure of his hand with an
answering expression of fondness.

"Dear Albert, how do you do? have you
not thought we were an age on the road?
But I hope you received my note." Ere he
could reply, Lady Dunmelraise's extended
hand was cordially presented to him, and as
affectionately taken; and while each rested
on his arm on entering the house, he felt in
the kindly pressure of both that he was as
welcome to them as ever.

When he had assisted Lady Dunmelraise,
who moved feebly, to the drawing-room, and
placed her pillows on the couch, even in
this moment of joyous re-union, he could not
fail to observe what ravages sickness had
made in her frame since they last met; and
as he expressed, though in modified terms, in
order not to alarm her, the regret he felt at
seeing her so unwell, he observed the eyes
of Lady Adeline fixed upon him, in order to
read his real opinion on the first sight he had
of her mother; and before he could regulate
his own feelings on the subject, those of Lady
Adeline's overshadowed her countenance with
an expression of sadness she was not prepared
to command, while the tears rushed to her
eyes. Again holding out her hand to Lord
Albert, while a smile of mingled joy and
sorrow beamed over her features, and partly
dispersed the cloud, she said,

"All will be well _now_; my dearest mamma
will soon be better--joy and happiness will
once again be our's." Lord Albert thanked
her with his eloquent eyes; and as he impressed
a kiss on her offered hand, he replied:

"How fortunate that I received your letter
when I did, for in another hour I should have
been on my way to Dunmelraise."

"Indeed!" said Lady Adeline, her eyes
sparkling with pleasure.

"Yes; and I had, but for something which
detained me, been on my road there long
before your letter arrived."

"That would indeed have been unfortunate,"
said Lady Dunmelraise; "to have
missed you after so long hoping to have seen
you there in vain, would have doubled our
regret;" she spoke with a tone of something
like reproach, at least so Lord Albert took
it; and she added, with a melancholy smile,
"It is a bad omen that a letter from _Adeline_
should have _prevented_ you from coming to
us."

Lord Albert felt embarrassed; there was
something relative to the delay of his coming
which he knew he could not explain, and this
consciousness made him feel as if he were
acting a double part. At this moment Lady
Adeline perceived the letters lying on the
table, and taking them up, she glanced her
eye over them as she turned them round one
by one, saying, "this is for you, mamma--and
this--and this--and this, as she handed them
to Lady Dunmelraise--but this one is for myself."
Lord Albert's attention had from the
first moment of her taking up the letters
been riveted upon her, and now with ill-concealed
anxiety he watched every turn of her
countenance, while she broke the seal and
perused the letter. She read it, he conceived,
with great interest; and said, when she had
concluded, addressing Lady Dunmelraise--

"It is a kind word of inquiry for you, my
dear mamma, from George Foley." Lord
Albert changed colour as this name was
pronounced; but neither she nor Lady Dunmelraise
observed the circumstance, and this
gave him leisure and power to recover from
the confusion he experienced. Lady Adeline
again resumed, after a short pause, "You
must have met Mr. Foley at Restormel, Albert;
what do you think of him?"

"I had little opportunity of judging of
him," replied Lord Albert, hesitating as he
spoke; "but he was only at Restormel for a
part of the time I was there. He had, however,
a strong recommendation to my favourable
opinion, from the warm terms of praise and
admiration in which he mentioned you, Adeline."
She smiled, and without any alteration
of manner went on to say:

"I am afraid then he has _too_ favourable an
opinion of me; and if he has raised your expectations
so high of my improvement since
last we met, I shall have reason to lament
your having become acquainted with him;
but he is such an _adorateur_ of mamma's, that
he thinks every thing that belongs to her is
perfection!"

Notwithstanding Lady Adeline's seeming
calmness while speaking of Mr. Foley--notwithstanding
the natural and ingenuous expression
of her words and countenance, Lord
Albert could not divest himself of the idea
that Mr. Foley had some undue power over
her affections. It is easy, perhaps, to shut
the door against evil thoughts; but when once
they are admitted, they obtain a footing and
a consequence which it was never intended
that they should have. Beware, all ye who
love, of admitting one spark of jealousy into
your breasts, without immediately quenching
the same by open and free discussion
with the object of your affections! But there
lies the difficulty--we are ashamed of harbouring
an injurious thought of those we love;
or rather, we are ashamed of _confessing_ that
we do so; and we go on in the danger of
concealment, rather than by humbling our
pride, and laying open our error, obtain the
probable chance of having it exposed, and
removed. While monosyllables of indifferent
import dropped from Lord Albert's lips, he
was in his heart cherishing the false notion that
had the letter, which gave him so much uneasiness,
been entirely of the import which
Lady Adeline represented it to be, it would
have been more natural to have addressed it
to Lady Dunmelraise herself.

He did not, indeed, dare to impugn Lady
Adeline's truth: but he conceived that no
other man should presume to have an interest
in her--in her who _belonged to himself_ (every
man will understand this), which could entitle
him to hold a correspondence with her. He
consequently became abstracted, and there was
a sort of restraint upon the ease of his manner
and conversation, of which Lady Dunmelraise's
penetration soon made her aware, and
to which even the young and unsuspecting
Adeline could not remain wholly blind.

In order to replace things on the footing
which they had been formerly, and which on
their first meeting they still appeared to be,
Lady Adeline turned the discourse to her pursuits
in the country, and spoke in detail of
her drawing, her music, her flower-garden,
and the families of the poor in their neighbourhood
whom she and Lord Albert had so
often visited together.

"You remember," she said, "poor Betsy
Colville, who never recovered the loss of her
lover who was shipwrecked; she is still in the
same state. She goes every day to the gate
where they last parted, takes out the broken
sixpence he gave her at their last interview;
and having returned home, looks in her father's
face, and says '_to-morrow_.' She never
repines, never misses church--joins in family
worship; but her poor mind is touched, and
she can no longer do the work of the house or
tend on her aged parents. I have therefore
paid my chief attentions to that family--and
they are so grateful--so grateful, too, for what
you have done for them. The myrtle we
planted together, Albert, on the gable-end of
the house, now nearly reaches the thatch;
and in all their distress about their daughter,
the good old pair have never forgotten to tend
that plant. Mr. Foley and I rode or walked
there every day."

The latter words of this discourse poisoned
all the sweetness of the preceding part; and the
idea of Mr. Foley became associated in Lord
Albert's distempered mind, with all the interest
and all the enthusiasm expressed by Lady
Adeline; so that he read in her descriptions of
her mode of having passed her time, and the
pleasure she had innocently enjoyed, nothing
but her love of Mr. Foley's company.

Lord Albert became still more silent, or
spoke only in broken sentences; and a deeper
gloom gradually spread over each of the three
individuals, usurping the place of that cordial
outpouring of the heart, which had at first
rendered the moment of meeting so delightful.
After a silence, during which Lady Adeline
and Lady Dunmelraise appeared mutually affected
by the awkwardness which the change
in Lord Albert's manner had excited, yet
anxious to conceal from each other the knowledge
that such was the case--they felt relieved,
when he took up a newspaper, and
read aloud the announcement of an approaching
drawing-room.

Lady Dunmelraise, glad of an opportunity
to find some subject of discourse foreign
to the thoughts which obtruded themselves so
painfully upon her, said, "Well, Adeline, that
is a favourable circumstance, _à quelque chose
malheur est bon_; had I not been so much
worse exactly at this very time, we had perhaps
not been in London; for though I have
for some months past wished you to be presented
at court, we might, ten to one, not
have had courage to leave Dunmelraise at
this sweet season; but as it is, the opportunity
must not be lost, and the only question is, by
whom shall the presentation take place--for
alas! I am not able myself to have that pleasure,
and I fear my dear sister Lady Delamere
will not either;" then pausing a moment,
she added, "perhaps, Lord Albert, Lady Tresyllian
will kindly take that office, if she is to be
in town."

"I am sure she would readily comply
with any wish of yours; but I know my mother
has, in a great measure, given up the
London world, and has not been at any of the
drawing-rooms during the present reign; but,
perhaps, on such an occasion, she might be
induced to forego her determination of retreat."

"Oh, I would not for the world," said
Lady Adeline, "torment Lady Tresyllian
about it; for," she added, smiling, "you know
how very little I care about such things."

"It is well," said Lady Dunmelraise, "to
hold every thing in estimation according to its
due value. Most young persons are _too_ fond of
the gaieties and pleasures of the world; but
you, my dear Adeline, perhaps contemn them
in one sweeping clause of indifference, without
having properly considered to what advantages
they may tend when resorted to in due degree,
and in subordination to better pursuits. A
drawing-room I hold to be one of those very
few worldly pageants which are connected with
some valuable and estimable feelings; the attending
them is an homage due to the state of
the sovereign; they uphold the aristocracy of
the country, which is one of the three great
powers of government, now too much, too
dangerously set aside; and they ought to, and
do in great measure, keep up those barriers
in society, which prevent an indiscriminate
admission of vice and virtue, at least as far as
regards an outward respect to the _appearances
of decorum_. Whenever drawing-rooms shall
be abolished, you will see that much greater
licence in society will take place. The countenance
of the sovereign, the right to be in
his presence, is one which none would voluntarily
resign; and to avoid losing it, is a
check upon the conduct of many, who are
not regulated by better motives; while those
who are, will always duly appreciate those
honours which flow from monarchs, and
which form a part of our glorious constitution.
'Love God, honour the king,' is the
good old adage; and with this conviction on
my mind, and the remembrance of that loyalty
and attachment to the present House of
Hanover which your ancestors have ever displayed,
even to the sacrifice of their lives and
fortunes, my Adeline, I have set my heart on
your being presented to your king; and the
only consideration is, who shall be the person
to present you."

"Well, dearest mamma," replied Lady Adeline,
"any thing you wish, I shall be delighted
to do, and I make no doubt you are perfectly
right; only I did not feel the least anxious, and
I wished to set your mind at rest upon the subject
of my going into public." Lord Albert said,
with an expression of melancholy and displeasure,
"It is quite unnatural for a young person
of your age, Adeline, to affect to despise the
amusements of the world; and unless you
have some _cause_ for doing so, best known to
yourself, I confess I do not understand it."

Lady Adeline was too quick-sighted not to
perceive that something or other pained and
displeased Lord Albert, and had they been
quite alone, she might have asked him the
occasion of this change in his humour; but
as it was, she did not dare to question him;
and by way of turning the conversation into
another channel, she inquired, of whom
consisted the party at Restormel; if they
were clever, or distinguished, or agreeable;
and whether the mode of life there was to his
taste? Lord Albert seemed to awake out of
a sort of reverie into which he had fallen,
and his countenance was agitated by many
commingling expressions as he replied,

"I really can hardly tell you; there were
the Tilneys, the Tenderdens, the Boileaus,
Lady Hamlet Vernon, Mr. Leslie Winyard.
At that sort of party there is little occasion
for the display of talent, and people are glad
to be quiet for a few days when they go to
their country houses; so that each individual
is thinking more of repose than of shining.
As to their mode of life, it was pretty nearly,
I think, what it is when they are in town."

Though Lord Albert spoke this in a hurried
tone, he felt as though he had got well over
a difficulty. But the remark Lady Dunmelraise
made upon his answer, did not particularly
serve his turn at the moment:--"Either
the persons who I heard composed
that party, or Lord Albert, must be much
changed since I knew them, if they could be
in unison," and she fixed her eyes upon him;--his
embarrassment was visible, and did not
subside as she went on to speak particularly
of Lady Hamlet Vernon: "She remembered
her marriage," she said, and commented
upon those sort of marriages, saying, "that
all intriguing schemes were detestable, but
those respecting marriage were of all others
the most thoroughly wicked and despicable.
Lady Hamlet's conduct, too, after marriage
was not very praiseworthy: if a woman sacrifice
every other consideration in allying
herself to her husband for the sake of aggrandizement,
she must at least continue to act
upon that system, and if possible wash out
the disgrace of such an act (for I consider it
to be no less) by her subsequent mode of
behaviour, and the dignified uses to which
she applies her power. But in the present
instance this was far from being the case,
and she had allowed an apparent levity of
conduct, at least, to sully her character. In
one instance, I _know_, she has drawn a person,
in whom I feel great interest, into a manner
of life, and an idleness of existence, which, to
call it by no harsher name, is one of vanity
and folly; but I had hoped her influence was
over in that quarter."

"As I do not know to what you allude,"
rejoined Lord Albert, "I cannot exactly reply;
but certainly Lady Hamlet Vernon is
very handsome, very agreeable, and, for aught
I know to the contrary, leads now a very good
sort of life. She has a finely-disposed heart,
and, I should think, is better than half the
people who find fault with her. If, from having
married an old _roué_, she was thrown into
danger, which her personal charms rendered
very likely to have been the case, kindness I
am sure would at any time open her eyes to
avoid these; whereas undue severity might
make her rush headlong into them--for harsh
opinions in similar cases, nine times out of
ten, drive such persons from bad to worse."

"I conceive," said Lady Dunmelraise, "that
this may sometimes be the case; but it is frequently
only an excuse for not choosing to hear
the truth told. However, there is a society,
of which Lady Hamlet Vernon is one, which
I hold to be the subverter of every thing estimable.
Its great danger is the specious ease
and indifference of those who compose it,
the system being without any system whatever.
The great gentleness of manner and
entire freedom, which seem to be its characteristics,
are its most dangerous snares. No
consecutive speech upon any subject, no power
of reasoning, no appeal to religion, are tolerated
by these persons. They have a lawless
form of self-government indeed, by which they
keep up their own sect and set,--but there is
a mystery in the delusions which they cast
around their victims, the more difficult to detect
since the whole of their lives is spent in a
seeming carelessness about every thing.

"The warning voice of a parent can alone
put a young and unsuspecting member of
society on his guard against being drawn into
this vortex; but it is the young married
persons to whom such warning is more particularly
necessary. However, because there
are persons, who by artful intrigue arrogate
to themselves a certain consideration,
which they receive from the uninstructed and
unwary, and whose ways are certainly not
those of pleasantness or peace--we are not to
say but that there are others who to the
highest rank unite the highest principles, and
who reflect honour on the class to which they
belong--persons who consider their high stations
as being the gifts of God, and themselves
as responsible agents. Yes, the true nobility
of Britain will yield to none other of any
country for intrinsic worth; all the virtues
adorn their families, and religion and honour
stamp them with that true nobility of soul,
without which all distinction is but a beacon
of disgrace.

"It is not, therefore, because a few worthless
or foolish persons, in the vast concourse
of London society, affect an exclusiveness
which rests on no basis of real worth or dignity,
but on the very reverse, that all intercourse
with the world is to be avoided, or all
innocent pleasure to be denied to young persons;
and I should be exceedingly disappointed
to see my Adeline retiring from her
state and station, and coming to have a distaste
for its amusements, because I feel certain that
so violent a re-action is not natural, and that
the real way to be of service to herself and
others, is to fulfil the rank and station of life
wherein she is placed, and in fact to do as our
great inimitable Pattern did--to go about
doing good."

Lord Albert's feelings, while Lady Dunmelraise
was speaking, had undergone many
changes, but the last was that of pleasurable
approval at finding Lady Dunmelraise's opinion
so much in coincidence with his own--and
he said, in his own natural warm manner,
"I hope Adeline will feel quite convinced, by
your sensible manner, my dear Lady Dunmelraise,
of representing this matter, that there is
no virtue, nothing commendable indeed, in despising
or condemning the world _en masse_, and
that there is just as much real good to be done
by living in as living out of it. True virtue
does not lie in time or place--it is of all times,
of all places; and it is a narrow, bigoted view
of the subject alone, which partakes of monastic
rigour and hypocritical ambition under
the garb of humility, which would promulgate
any other doctrine."

"My dear Albert, you know that I have no
wish but to please mamma and you; and I
need not pretend but that I shall be exceedingly
diverted by going to public places. All
I meant to say was, not to make yourselves
uneasy about finding a _chaperon_ for me, because
I am perfectly contented to remain as I
am--although I might be equally well diverted
in leading what is called a gayer life."

Lord Albert's countenance relapsed into
brightness as he said, taking her hand and
putting it to his lips, "You are a dear and a
rare creature--is she not, Lady Dunmelraise?"--and
this appeal Lady Dunmelraise felt no
inclination to controvert; but, rejoicing in the
present disposition which she once more beheld
in her future son-in-law, she now dismissed
him for the evening, saying, "Adeline
and I require some repose, that we may be
fresh to-morrow for all the great events to
which we shall look forward with pleasure, I
am sure, as you seem to be quite of our way
of thinking respecting her _début_ in the great
world--and so good night." The wish was
reiterated kindly, warmly, by all parties, and
they parted happier even than they had met.

As soon as Lord Albert reached his hotel,
he found a note from Lady Hamlet Vernon,
announcing her arrival from Restormel, and
requesting to see him. In an instant, as though
by magic, his doubts and fears respecting Lady
Adeline returned; for with Lady Hamlet Vernon
was connected the recollection of her
mysterious note at Restormel, on the morning
of his departure from thence--and with that
recollection George Foley was but too deeply
mingled. Then ensued a chaos in his mind,
one thought chasing another, and none abiding
to fix any purpose or decide any measure.
At one moment he determined--if such passing
impulse can be called determination--not
to go near Lady Hamlet; but the next he
thought she had shewn so much true interest
for him--she had listened so often to his
rebukes--apparently with more pleasure than
she did to praise from others--that he should
be ungrateful to avoid her _now_, because other
dearer interests filled up his time and his heart,
and he finally resolved on obeying her wishes,
and visiting her the next day.

In the morning of that day, before he had
finished his late breakfast, and ere he was
prepared to deny himself, the door of his
apartment opened, and Mr. Foley was close
to him ere his servant had time to announce
his name.

"I am come," said the latter, with his
polite and honeyed phrase, "to bring you
pleasant tidings, which I trust will apologize
for this my early intrusion. I am just arrived
from South Audley Street, where I had the
happiness of finding our friends pretty well;
Lady Dunmelraise, indeed, was not up, having
been fatigued by her journey; but Lady
Adeline is blooming in beauty--I do not know
when I have seen her looking better." Lord
Albert bowed, and in his coldest manner replied,
"he was very happy indeed to hear that
Lady Adeline Seymour was so well, and he
hoped, when he should make his personal
inquiries, to find Lady Dunmelraise in the
drawing-room."

Mr. Foley was too penetrating not to see
that this information, as it came from him,
conveyed no pleasurable feeling; but affecting
not to observe this, he went on to talk of the
late party at Restormel--spoke of Lady
Hamlet Vernon as being a delightful creature,
and drew a kind of parallel _raisonné_ between
her character and that of Lady Adeline's.
Lord Albert was thinking, all the time he
spoke, of the impertinent assumption of Mr.
Foley's addressing him on the subject of Lady
Adeline, and discussing her merits, as though
he were not aware of them, and had not a
better right and ampler means to know and
to value them.

Still there was a suavity--a delicacy even,
in Mr. Foley's mode of expressing himself,
which gave no tangible opportunity to shew
offence; and Lord Albert, though writhing
under impatience, was obliged to control
himself. As soon as he could possibly contrive
to do so, he changed the conversation, and
spoke of the Opera, the Exhibition, the topics
of the day--of all, in short, that was most
uninteresting to him; and carried on an under
current of thought all the time on the impropriety
Adeline had been guilty of, in receiving
Mr. Foley without her mother's presence to
sanction such a visit, and on going himself
directly to South Audley Street, in order that
he might disclose to her his opinion on the
inexpediency of such a measure, as that of her
receiving the visits of young men when alone.
But though the evident abstraction of Lord
Albert D'Esterre rather increased than diminished,
still Mr. Foley sat on, and sometimes
rose to make a remark on a picture--sometimes
opened a book, and commented upon its
contents. Similar provocation must have occurred
to every one at some time or other,
and it is in vain to describe what, after all, no
description can do justice to. A note arrived
for Lord Albert--it was from Lady Adeline--very
kind, but desiring him not to come to
South Audley Street till four o'clock--saying
she was going, by her mamma's desire, to see
her aunt Lady Delamere, who was confined by
a feverish cold, and could not leave her chamber
to come to them.

Lord Albert's mortification was painted on
his countenance. "If you have nothing better
to do this morning, D'Esterre, and that your
note does not otherwise take up your time,
will you accompany me to Lady Hamlet
Vernon's?" Lord Albert felt, "what, am I to
be balked, dogged, forestalled in every trifling
circumstance by this man!" but he _said_,
hesitating as he spoke, "yes--no, that is to
say, I had an engagement, but it is postponed
for the present--therefore, if you please, I
will accompany you to Lady Hamlet's door;"
and Mr. Foley, evidently triumphing in having
foiled Lord Albert's real intentions, whatever
they might be, but maintaining still his quiet
composure, offered Lord Albert his arm, and
they walked together towards Grosvenor
Square, each talking of one thing and thinking
of another.




CHAPTER IV.

AN EXCLUSIVE MORNING PARTY.


As they walked along between Lord Albert's
house and that of their destination, one idea
took the lead in D'Esterre's mind--it was the
hope of obtaining from Lady Hamlet Vernon
an elucidation of the mysterious expressions
contained in her note. He formed a thousand
plans how he should contrive to remain
alone with her, after Mr. Foley should take
his leave, for he made no question but that
he would be the first to end his visit; and he
settled it in his own mind that he would affect
to have some message to give Lady Hamlet,
which might afford him an opportunity of
procuring the interview he so eagerly desired:
but almost always, in similar circumstances,
none of these minor events occur as
we intend they should; and the first object
Lord Albert saw on entering Lady Hamlet
Vernon's drawing-room was Lady Tenderden,
sitting at a writing table, having taken off
her bonnet as though she had come upon
some particular occasion, and was fixed there
for a considerable time.

"Ah! Lord Albert," said Lady Hamlet
Vernon, "and Mr. Foley too! Most welcome
both.--Restormel was quite dull without
you; and besides the comfort one always feels
at coming back to the dear dirty streets,
after having been banished from them a few
days, I am really charmed to find myself
once more surrounded by all my friends. Do
tell us the news, and sit down--you shall not
positively pay me a flying visit--though you,
Lord Albert, flew away in such a hurry from
Restormel, that we had not time, no not even
to say 'farewell;'"--(and she looked at him
very significantly as she spoke.) "So before I
shall have time now to speak to you, you will
be gone again--but if so, it is not _my_ fault."

Lord Albert thought that he read the
meaning of this speech, and his impatience
and anxiety were increased in proportion.
It was with the utmost difficulty he could
bring himself to leave her side in order to go
to the other end of the room, in obedience
to Lady Tenderden, who called him every
now and then to ask some silly question or
other, which he hardly answered; and which
induced her, therefore, to beg him to come
and sit near her, that she might talk to him
comfortably while she was writing: two
things which she declared she could do quite
well at the same time. As soon as Lady
Tenderden had managed this contrivance,
Mr. Foley entered into (apparently) a very
interesting conversation with Lady Hamlet
Vernon; and Lord Albert sat on thorns as
his eyes were rivetted on them, while he contrived
to answer Lady Tenderden, although
it were as if he was playing at cross purposes.
Any change was a relief, and the announcement
of Lord Glenmore was a real pleasure
to him, for he thought his arrival must at
least break up the _tête-à-tête_ between Lady
Hamlet and Mr. Foley, which seemed to him
as if it never would end.

After having paid his compliments to Lady
Hamlet Vernon and Lady Tenderden, Lord
Glenmore accosted his friend, and cordially
wished him joy in a sort of half whisper, on
Lady Dunmelraise's arrival. But, in Lord
Albert's present frame of mind, this congratulation
was not received with that open warmth
which Lord Glenmore expected; and he
dropped the subject, taking up those of the
common-place occurrences of the day. The
drawing-room was discussed; it was to be
fuller than any preceding one. Lady Tilney
had declared she would not go--so had Lady
Ellersby; "but, nevertheless," said Lord
Glenmore, with one of his good-humoured
smiles, "I dare say those ladies will not
have the cruelty to allow their absence to
be regretted when the time arrives; do you
think they will, Lady Hamlet Vernon?"

"Most indubitably not, and I make no
doubt the _plumassiers_ and jewellers are all
at this moment in requisition in Lady Tilney's
boudoir. But, by the way, Lord Glenmore,
your fair lady will of course be presented on
your marriage--who is to have the pleasure of
presenting her?"

"Who? why of course her mother, Lady
Melcomb."

Lady Hamlet Vernon and Lady Tenderden
here exchanged the most significant glances,
and a silence ensued; which was first broken
by Lord Glenmore, who endeavoured to draw
Lord Albert into conversation by touching
alternately on politics, literature, and all the
subjects which he knew were interesting to
him; but to which he could only obtain some
short answer, that did not promote the flow
of the conversation. He began to ask himself
whether he could have given Lord Albert
any offence, or whether he retained any on
account of their interview in the Park; but it
was so unlike Lord Albert to take offence
where it never was intended to be given,
that he concluded (as was in fact the case)
that something painful was on his mind, of
which he could not divest himself. Having
vainly attempted, by raillery as well as by
engaging his attention, to get the better of
this abstraction and gloom, Lord Glenmore
let the matter pass, and addressed his conversation
elsewhere; but Lady Tenderden was
not to be diverted from her purpose, and she
took up the thread of discourse, requesting
to know if Lady Adeline Seymour had imposed
a vow of silence upon him, or what
other cause had so changed him since he was
last at Restormel? He pleaded total ignorance
of being changed; but the consciousness
that he was so, rendered his efforts at
disguise only more visible.

Lord Albert rose and sat down; a hundred
times he looked at a French clock on the chimney-piece,
which of course did not go; and
at last requested Mr. Foley to tell him the
hour, as he had an engagement which demanded
his attention. Having found that it
was a full half hour past the time appointed
by Lady Adeline, he made his bow to Lady
Hamlet Vernon, and was about to leave the
room, when she called him back, and said,
"of course we all meet in the evening at
Lady Tilney's?" There was a glance and an
emphasis which accompanied these words,
which he could not fail to interpret as an
assignation, and one that he determined on
his part to keep.

Could Lord Albert have known what was
passing in Lady Adeline's mind, while he was
thus misspending his time in a false anxiety
about a few mysterious words, written, it
might be, with no good intent, and indeed it
might be without any foundation, he would
have hastened away from this idle and unworthy
mode of passing his time long before
he did; but experience unfortunately must be
bought, and although we look upon the actions
of others, and comment upon them, it
may be with the calm wisdom of unmoved
breasts, yet in our own time of trial we are too
apt to prove that theory is not practice. One
would imagine that it was the easiest thing
possible to place one's-self ideally in the
situation of another, to feel as he felt, and
yet act diametrically opposite to the way in
which he acted, in certain circumstances
and positions; but this apparent facility of
transmigration into the identity of another's
being is mere delusion. It may be questioned
if any human creature really understands
another, and how much less likely is it that
he should argue justly on his neighbour's
affairs! Oh, if we were more merciful to
others, and more severe on ourselves; more
humble as to our own merits and more alive
to those of our fellow creatures; we should be
nearer the mark of justice than we usually
are.

While Lord Albert, under the influence of
a tormenting incipient jealousy, wasted the
hour at Lady Hamlet Vernon's which he
should have passed in South Audley Street,
Lady Adeline had been with her aunt, Lady
Delamere, who, in a true spirit of affectionate
solicitude, had nevertheless opened up a
source of anxiety and doubt in the breast
of her niece, which proved the cause of
infinite distress to her. Lady Delamere, after
receiving her with all that glow of partial
fondness peculiarly characteristic of her family,
it might be too much so towards each
other, naturally spoke of Lord Albert D'Esterre.

"Ah, my dear Adeline, now the time approaches
when, according to your father's
will, your final decision respecting the fulfilment
of your marriage must take place, my
anxious fondness suggests a thousand fears,
at least doubts, for your happiness. I beseech
you let these four intervening months at least
be given, not only to a serious examination of
your own heart, but to a clear and vigorous
elucidation of the disposition and principles
of Lord Albert."

"As to my own heart," replied Lady Adeline
with quickness, "it has long not been in
my own keeping, for most fortunately, where
my duty was directed to place it, there my
choice seconded, nay, almost preceded the
arrangement. But why should you doubt that,
such being the case, my happiness should be
endangered? say rather, dearest aunt, confirmed."

"It may be so--I trust it will be so, my
sweet Adeline, since your love is fixed; but
remember how very serious a step marriage
is; and before you are bound for life in the
holiest of all ties, again I conjure you to lay
aside, inasmuch as you can do so, all the
blandishments of love, and consider how far
the tastes, the pursuits, the temper, above all
the religious tenets of your husband, will be in
accordance with your own. Indeed, indeed,
people do not reflect seriously _enough_ on these
points. I ask not any long consideration, any
great trial of time or absence--they are both
circumstances which may deceive either way;
for things viewed at a distance, are not seen
in their true light; and one may be as much
deceived at the end of a year, as at the end of
a month--and life is short. The life of life,
the bloom of youth, should not be needlessly
withered in pining anxiety. What I ask of
you is, during the time you are now to be in
town, to go out with moderation into the
great world, to see what it has to offer, and
to know whether any other person might supersede
Lord Albert in your affections; this
is as yet a fair and honourable trial. You are
_not bound_ to each other, if either wishes to
break the tie." (Lady Adeline sighed heavily.)
"And should you, while together, discover
any flaw or imperfection which might make
you wish to dissolve the engagement, now is
the time; but after marriage, I need not say,
my Adeline, that one glance of preference for
another is guilt--one wish, foreign to your
allegiance as a wife, is _misery_."

There was a pause in the conversation.
Lady Adeline felt sorrowful--she scarcely knew
why, except indeed it had never occurred to
her that any thing could step in to break off
her engagement with Lord Albert; and the
bare possibility of such an event seemed to
unhinge her whole being.

The fact is, Lady Delamere had heard surmises
of Lord Albert's intimacy with Lady
Hamlet Vernon, and without informing her
niece of a report which, after all, might not
have any foundation, she yet conceived it to
be a duty to put her on her guard, and make
her ready to observe any alteration that might
have taken place in Lord Albert. She would
have told Lady Dunmelraise all that she had
heard without disguise; but at present her
state of health was such, that she could not
think of endangering her life by giving her
such information; for she well knew her sister's
heart was set upon the match, and that
she had long loved Lord Albert as though he
had been her son. However, she determined,
the moment Lady Dunmelraise was better, to
have no concealment from her. It had not
been without much self-debate that she had
brought herself even to hint any thing like a
doubt to Lady Adeline of Lord Albert's truth;
and even now, she only endeavoured to prepare
her to open her eyes to the conviction,
should such a melancholy change have taken
place, but without naming the real cause she
had for giving her such caution.

As it was, it was quite enough to sadden
Lady Adeline; and her air was so dejected
when she returned home to Lady Dunmelraise,
that the latter feared something had occurred
to vex her. "Is my sister worse,
dearest child?--I pray you do not conceal the
truth from me."

"Oh no;--be not alarmed," she replied,
"my aunt hopes, in a day or two, to be able to
come to see you, dearest mamma. It is not
that--but I have a bad head-ache, and have
undergone too much excitement." The look
of anxious inquiry which Lady Dunmelraise
could not conceal, lessened not Lady Adeline's
unhappiness; and as the time which
she had appointed for Lord Albert's visit
was now far passed, the whole weight of
the sad warnings she had received, seemed
doubled. At length the peculiar knock--the
quick footstep on the stair, told her he was
come, and she passed from her mother's bedroom
into the adjoining drawing-room to meet
him.

They seemed mutually affected by some
secret cause; for there was not that cordial
clasping of hands--that beaming of eyes--that
joyful tone of greeting, which might have been
expected to mark their meeting on this occasion:
their hands touched coldly--and Lord
Albert made no effort to retain her's.

"You have been very much later than I
expected, Albert."

"Yes: I could not exactly obey the hour
named in your note, as you went out before I
could possibly come here this morning; and
as you put me off, I had another engagement,
which in my turn detained me; however, I
was happy to hear you were well from Mr.
Foley, who had the pleasure of seeing you,
I believe, very early."

"Yes: Mr. Foley, you know, as mamma's
_protégé_ and _enfant de famille_, has the _entrée_
at all hours, and I was drawing when he
came in; I thought it was you, and--

"Oh, dear Lady Adeline, you cannot suppose
I should take the liberty of inquiring
what you were doing--I hope Lady Dunmelraise
is better to-day?"

Lady Adeline, under any other influence than
that which now influenced her, would have
said, "Albert, what is the matter with you? are
you displeased?" But her aunt's advice was,
"look well to the real state of Lord Albert's
affections, and do not allow your own to give
a colouring to his, which may not be the true
one, were his heart unbiassed by the flattering
predilection you so openly profess for
him." This advice sealed her lips; and,
checking the natural impulse of her heart,
she replied to his inquiries about her mother
more at length than she would have done,
in order to recover a composure she was far
from feeling; she allowed all further discussion
of her mode of passing the morning to
drop.

Lord Albert's restrained, unnatural manner
increased, and they both felt relieved
when Lady Dunmelraise called from her
apartment to her daughter--who obeyed the
summons; but returning after a minute's
absence, she said,

"Mamma hopes you will dine with us to-day."

"Oh, certainly, if Lady Dunmelraise wishes
me to do so:" and as Lady Adeline made no
reply, but returned to her mother, Lord Albert
departed to dress.

When they met at dinner, Lady Dunmelraise's
presence for a time prevented the
awkwardness they mutually felt; but she
soon found that the conversation was entirely
left to her, and could not be long
without perceiving that something had occurred
which altered Lord Albert's manner.
Hoping it, however, only to be one
of those fallings-out of lovers which are the
renewal of love, Lady Dunmelraise turned
the conversation entirely upon the coming
drawing-room, and the more interest she
seemed to take in her daughter's going into
the gay world, the more grave did Lord
Albert become: this was a contradiction to
what he had expressed respecting that measure,
and, as Lady Dunmelraise thought, a
caprice of temper, which she was sorry to
observe in him. She hoped, however, that
the thoughts which involuntarily arose in her
mind were groundless, and she determined
not to act precipitately; but felt glad that she
was come to town, where she would have an
opportunity of judging further, and of seeing
how matters stood from her own personal
observation of Lord Albert's conduct. She
considered that to probe her daughter's feelings
upon the subject, would be to excite them
so painfully, that they might destroy the power
of a cool judgment. She therefore resolved
to postpone any avowal of her own sentiments,
any positive declaration of her own
doubts, till the time, which was now fast approaching,
for Lady Adeline's ultimate decision,
should afford her a proper opportunity
of speaking her mind unreservedly to Lord
Albert; unless, indeed, circumstances of an
imperious kind relative to his conduct should
make such a step necessary before that
period.

In this disposition of mind, the parties
could not enjoy each other's society. The
conversation was broken, interrupted, and in
itself devoid of interest; so that when Lord
Albert arose to take his leave about ten
o'clock, Lady Adeline almost felt it a relief.
"What, are you going to leave us so soon?"
said Lady Dunmelraise, with visible surprise.

"I am sorry that a particular engagement
obliges me to go."

"And may I ask," rejoined Lady Dunmelraise,
in her quick way when she was not
pleased at any thing, "may I take the
liberty of asking where you are going?"

"Oh, certainly--to Lady Tilney's."

"To Lady Tilney's _party_!" with a marked
emphasis on the last word; and then checking
herself, and resuming her usual dignity
of composure, she added, "I hope you will
have an agreeable _soirée_; when one lives out
of the world, and grows old, one forgets the
delights of these sort of re-unions; but, of
course, one must do in London as they do in
London; and I believe, like most other things,
the habit of attending them becomes a second
nature." Lord Albert smiled--it might be
in acquiescence, it might be in disdain; and
with many good-nights, he slightly touched
the hands of Lady Dunmelraise and her
daughter, and departed.

There was a silence, an awkward silence;
neither liked to express the thought that was
uppermost in her mind, for fear of wounding
the other. At length Lady Dunmelraise
spoke: "It is strange," she said, "to observe
the sort of hold which foolish things sometimes
obtain over sensible men. The class of persons
with whom Lord Albert seems now to be
living, are not those I should have conceived
that he would ever have selected; but fashion
leads young people to do a thousand silly
things, which they repent when their ripened
judgment shews them in their true colours;
and to say truth, I think Lord Albert's manners
altogether have not gained by foreign
travel. But I suppose I must not express
such treason to you, Adeline?" Lady Adeline
tried to smile, as she replied:

"I have hardly had time to judge;" and
Lady Dunmelraise turned the discourse rather
on the associates of Lord Albert than on
himself.

"The persons," she said, "he named to
us as having been at Restormel, and with
whom he now appears so much engaged, are
those who live entirely for this world: and
not even for the most dignified employments
or pursuits of this present existence. Fortune,
health, and morals, are all likely to become
the prey of a voracious appetite for
pleasure; and when we live only to pleasure,
we lose all title to being rational souls, and
make a wreck of happiness. I am willing to
hope and believe, that many are ensnared
to tread this Circean circle who are in ignorance
of what it leads to; who see in it only a
brilliant phantom of amusement, a glittering
_ignis fatuus_ that pleases their fancy, but which,
alas! I fear, too frequently leads them on,
till some entanglement of fortune, or virtue,
levels them with its worse members; and from
which it is a mercy indeed if they ever escape."

Lady Adeline had listened to her mother
with an interest that made her shudder.
"And is it, indeed," she cried, "in such a
set that Albert is thrown!" while the paleness
of her countenance expressed the anguish of
her mind.

"I trust not, my dearest child. I do
not mean to say, for I have no right so
to say, that Lord Albert is habitually one of
this set;--heaven forbid!--but that he frequents
their society appears evident. However,
let us not think evil before it actually
occurs; let us judge dispassionately, and see
for ourselves. You are now, my love, to enter
into the great world under an excellent and
loving guide; and having warned you, I leave
your own good sense to do the rest." Lady
Adeline sighed heavily, and did not seem able
at all to rally her spirits. "Now, love, let us
turn to lighter matters," said Lady Dunmelraise,
"and consider the arrangements of
your presentation dress."

"I should prefer its being as simple as possible,"
said Lady Adeline, "and the rest I
leave entirely to your, and," she added hesitatingly,
"to Lord Albert's tastes." Her
mother shortly after proposed retiring for the
night, and trembled as she saw how deeply
her daughter's happiness seemed to depend
on Lord Albert, perceiving that she referred
every trifle to his arbitration.

When he left South Audley Street to go
to Lady Tilney's supper party, Lord Albert
ran over again in his mind the occurrences of
the day, and in Lady Adeline's silence, her
manner, her looks, he thought he read an
indifference towards himself, which at once
piqued and wounded him. In all that had
fallen from Lady Dunmelraise, in all that he
could gather from _her_ manner towards himself,
he could not fix on any thing unkind or
unjust; but from the consciousness of his own
conduct not having been what it ought, his
heart was ill at ease, and he knew not with
what right he felt angry; but yet he did so
feel, and was tempted to inveigh against
the fickleness of woman, while a thought of
Mr. Foley obtruded itself among all the rest,
and shewed him an imaginary rival.

"Can all this," he asked himself, "be only
preparatory to her breaking off her engagement
altogether?"

Such was the mood of mind in which Lord
Albert entered Lady Tilney's drawing-rooms,
and as hardly any of the invited were as yet
come from the Opera, he had leisure unmolested
to walk through them. They were brilliantly
lighted, and filled with all the rifled
sweets of the green-house; sweets, which
seem but ill suited in their fresh purity for the
scene they were brought to adorn.

While the apartments were still empty, he
had an opportunity of examining some of the
works of art with which they were decorated.
He stopped opposite to a Claude, which was
certainly a contrast to the feelings of his own
mind. The glowing sunrise, the dancing
wave, the palace of the Medici, the business
of a sea-port, conveyed him in idea to the
Pitti Palace. "Often as that subject has been
repeated," he said, turning to Mr. Francis
Ombre, "by the same pencil, it is always new,
always redolent of repose and pleasure; the
scintillating sunbeams are still emblematic
of that dancing of the heart, which in the
morning of our days gilds every thing with
beauty: no, there is no after-pleasure which
can equal the sunrise of existence; and if
ever picture conveyed a moral truth, the pictures
of Claude most assuredly have this
power."

"Yes," replied Mr. Ombre, "I love to
sun myself at a Claude, it is the only sun one
does see in this climate." Lord Albert passed
on, sighing as he went, and his attention was
again arrested by an antique bust of Psyche:
"What refinement of tenderness in the eyelid;
what soul in the curvature of the lip!
how the line swells, and then is lost again in
the almost dimpling roundness of the chin!
how child-like, and yet how replete with
meaning, the turn of the head and neck! it is
at once the bud, the flower, the fruit of beauty
amalgamated and embodied in the marble."

It was indeed an emblem of soul. And
of whom did it remind Lord Albert? Of
his own Adeline. His own! there was an
electric touch in the thought--was she _indeed
still his own_, or had he lost her for ever?
Lady Hamlet Vernon had stood unperceived
by him, watching him for some previous
minutes, and by that sense which
never fails to inform a woman in love, she
felt certain from his manner of looking at
the Psyche, that it conveyed more to interest
him than any mere ideas of _virtù_ could possibly
do.

Her agitation was extreme, and she could
scarcely master it so as to wear a semblance
of composure; at length, though the part
she had to play was a difficult one, she determined
on fulfilling her assignation; and
having previously decided how she should
manage what she had to do, she went up to
him, and at the very moment he was asking
himself whether or not he had lost Adeline
for ever, a soft voice awoke him to a sense of
who and where he was: he turned round and
beheld Lady Hamlet Vernon. The recognition
of any one whom we believe has an interest
in us when the heart feels desolate, is a
powerful cordial to the spirits.

Lord Albert greeted her with an animation of
pleasure that he was scarcely himself aware
of, and which elicited from her an answering
sentiment of kindness, that at once cheered
and gave him new life. "I have much to say
to you," he whispered; "let us sit down in
yonder alcove, which is unoccupied, and
where we may have an opportunity of speaking
unheard by others." He offered her his
arm, which she accepted, and they moved to
that part of the apartment. At the same instant
Lady Glenmore entered, leaning on her
husband's arm, and a crowd followed which
filled the room. Among these, Mr. Leslie
Winyard and Lady Tenderden were conspicuous
personages: but Lady Glenmore was
the _nouveauté du jour_. When Georgina Melcomb
was an unmarried girl, nobody looked
at her, or thought about her; but now that
she was to play a part, and in her turn become
a card to play in the game of fashion, all eyes
were fixed upon her. At this moment she
was the very picture of innocent happiness,
and in the countenance of her husband shone
the reflection of her own felicity. There is
something in that sort of happiness which
involuntarily inspires respect, and to all
hearts that are not dead to nature, there is
awakened a simultaneous sensation of pleasure.

But yet there are serpents in the world,
who, envious of such pure bliss, seek only its
destruction. "Really," said Mr. Leslie Winyard
to Lady Tenderden, "that is a fine-looking
creature!" speaking of Lady Glenmore
as she stood talking with animation to
her husband, "and when she has rubbed
off a little of her coarseness, and become
somewhat less conjugally affected, I don't
know but what I may do her the honour to
talk to her sometimes myself." Lady Tenderden
laughed as she replied,

"There is no saying how condescending
you may become--but when do you intend to
begin? don't you see that if she is allowed to
go on in this way, she will never get out Of
it? and as I have undertaken her education
myself, I do beg that you will by some contrivance
unhook her from Lord Glenmore, and
leave me to engage his attention while I make
my pupil over to you for the evening, _vraiment
ça vaut la peine_; only _la jeune Ladi est
tant soit peu maussade et il faut la mettre sur
le bon chemin_."

"With all my heart; if you will only
begin the attack I will follow it up."

"_Allons donc_," she replied, taking his arm
and going towards the Glenmores.

The usual nothings of common-place talk,
the unmeaning greetings, and the self-same
observations on singers and dancers which
have been made a hundred times before, opened
the meditated campaign. "My dear Lord
Glenmore," said Lady Tenderden, "I have
long wished to consult you about a _changement
de décoration_" (and she looked at Mr.
Leslie Winyard) "which I purpose making in
my house in town, and I have some thoughts
of copying in part the Rotunda-room which
is here, only there are some objections to be
made to it, which I wish to avoid if possible,
and I am desirous that you should assist me
with your perfection of taste; have the kindness
for a moment to come with me--but I
could not think of giving Lady Glenmore that
trouble. There, Mr. Winyard, while I run
away with my lord, do you make the _preux
chevalier_, and defend Lady Glenmore from
all dangers."

So saying, she passed her arm through
Lord Glenmore's and led him away. Lady
Glenmore looked for a moment as if she
intended to follow, and even half rose from
her chair for that purpose; but the lessons
Lady Tenderden had given her about
not seeming to pursue her husband recurred
to her, and she sat down again, blushing and
breathless, and evidently discomposed. Mr.
Leslie Winyard enjoyed the scene: "shall I
call Lord Glenmore back again?" he asked,
after fixing his eyes upon her maliciously,
"or will you allow me to conduct you to
him?" and he smiled, evidently in ridicule at
her awkwardness. But she was not a fool,
though ignorant of the ways of the world; and
in a few minutes she recovered herself, and
spoke uncommonly well on common-place
topics, to the astonishment of her hearer:
she even passed upon the set to which he
belonged some very stinging remarks, the
more so from their being uttered as if unconscious
that they were so, or that he was one
of the persons to whom they applied.

"Do you know," said he, gazing at her with
looks of admiration, "do you know you are
a very extraordinary personage? Suffer me to
say that this is all very well in joke, but if
you are _serious_ in your opinions, we must
undergo a great revolution, or we shall not
be at all able to live with you. I do not pretend,"
he said, "to decide who is in the right
or who is in the wrong, but I am very certain
of one thing, a change must take place
somewhere, if your ideas of things in general
are correct." Lady Glenmore replied, "that
she was very certain her ideas would _not_
change;" to which he rejoined, "_nous verrons_."

At that moment a move in the room
announced that every one was going to supper,
and the doors were thrown open into an
adjoining apartment, towards which there
was a general rush. Lady Glenmore again
cast her eye anxiously around, but in vain--her
husband was not to be seen.

"Allow me," said two or three young men,
offering their arm to her, "to hand you to
supper," and in the confusion she took that
of Mr. Leslie Winyard. "But," he observed,
"you seem so uneasy, that if you will allow
me, I will merely see you agreeably placed,
and go in quest of this envied Lord Glenmore."

"You are very good," she replied, "but
I cannot think of giving you that trouble."

"Oh dear, I beg you will not mention it;
and the mission is so new a one, that I am
particularly proud to be employed in executing
it."

"How, new? Is there any thing extraordinary
in wishing to know whether one's husband
chooses one should go home, or whether
he stays supper or not?"

"Yes, Lady Glenmore! most new! most
wonderful! But I do not think it is a fashion
that will generally take. But here is
a table with some seats unoccupied. Will
you allow me to recommend your availing
yourself of it? It seems to be the choice of the
chosen; here is Lady Hamlet Vernon, and
Lord D'Esterre, and the Boileaus, and the
Ellersbys, and Mr. Spencer Newcomb; do
take this seat, and I will go in quest of your
lord and _master_. But see, he has not fallen
into any of the whirlpools or quicksands that
you seem to apprehend for him in these dangerous
regions, for by all that is fortunate
there he is next to Lady Tenderden."

"Where?" cried Lady Glenmore, looking
eagerly around.

"The third table from us, just behind
Lady Baskerville; however, if you are still
_uneasy_, you have only to command me."

"No, it is his intention to remain for supper,
and all is well, for if he had wanted me he
would have sought for me."

"Always depend upon that. And now what
shall I help you to?" Lady Glenmore, in
her own mind, was not at all satisfied as to
the danger of whirlpools and quicksands,
though they were of another sort from those
Mr. Winyard had passed his jokes on; but
again Lady Tenderden's advice recurred to
her, which had acquired consequence from
Lord Glenmore's opinion of that lady, and
she endeavoured to enter into the conversation
of those around her. It was a sort of
dead language as yet to her ears, but she
could perceive that, under disguise, many
allusions were made to herself, and to her untutored
behaviour, which checked her natural
flow of spirits, and she gradually became silent,
and could no longer conceal her anxious
impatience to be once more safe under her
husband's wing. The very first person that
arose afforded her an opportunity of doing so
likewise, and making a sign to Lord Glenmore,
she waited for him in the door-way.
He was not long before he joined her, and
with apparently mutual satisfaction they once
more found themselves together. This difference,
however, existed in their feelings, that
Lord Glenmore, though honourable himself,
and incapable of thinking really ill of others,
however he might consider them trifling, yet
from habit and the manners of the world, had
not an idea of watching his wife's conduct in
public.

Lord Glenmore's character has been already
described; but it has not perhaps been sufficiently
explained how very much his guileless
unsuspecting nature laid him open to become
the prey of others who were the reverse.
Let no man cast a young wife (unprepared for
the dangers she will meet with) upon the
licentious intercourse of the world of _ton_, nor
leave her, unguarded by his presence and
authority, to stem the tide of vice which may
steal in upon her unawares. It is a husband's
duty to be the guide and support of his wife;
and, without tyranny, but with the determined
rectitude of tender solicitude, to watch over
their mutual interests. The maxim so often
quoted, that "the wife whom a man can doubt
is not worthy of his regard," is not always a
true one. Every mortal is liable to err--and
why should woman, the weaker sex, be cast
upon the world, and committed to its dangers,
without stay or support from her natural
guardian and protector?

The fact is, it is a maxim often resorted to
in idleness or indifference, and is more frequently
an apology for bad conduct in those
who make it, than arising from any true nobility
of soul or any moral or religious principle.
Lord Glenmore, from living in the midst of
the world of fashion, and from never having
(a rare instance) been spoiled by such a life,
was less aware than any human being perhaps
of the danger to which he was exposing his
young wife. Had any body told him the terms
upon which she was to be admitted as one of
the _élite_ of _ton_, in plain language, he would
have started with disgust and horror from all
such association; but, like some few, deceived
as he was by specious appearances, he saw
nothing in the set but the airiness of fashion,
and the folly, at worst, of a few months during
the London season; whereas the truth stood
thus.--

The husband of an Exclusive must be exclusively
given to his own devices, without ever
making his wife a party at all concerned in
them; unless, indeed, they arrive at that _acmé_
of exclusive perfection when they boast to
each other of the degrading license of their
lives, and tell of their different favourites,
comparing the relative merits of these with
that of others of the same society. Into the
mysteries of an exclusive _coterie_ no unmarried
woman, that is to say, no girls, are to be admitted--in
order that the conversation may be
unchecked. The more admirers a married
woman has, the higher her reputation amongst
them; and it is never quite complete till some
one _adorateur_ moving in the same circle is the
_ami preféré_. If the cavalier be a man of title,
power, and wealth, then the lady has _the
world--their_ world--at her feet. This arrangement
ensures the latter (whatever her husband's
fortune may be) the advantages of dress
and equipage, from which expense _he_ is then
exonerated; and while he has the credit of
keeping up a tasteful establishment, he is
exempted from all trouble or thought as to the
means by which it is so kept. But as in all
communities there are different degrees of
distinction, so in this,--those who commence
their career have a certain rubicon to pass
through before they arrive at such a height of
perfection.

The first requisite for a newly-initiated
member to know is, how to cut all friends
and relations who are not deemed worthy of
being of a certain _coterie_;--the next, is to dress
after a particular fashion, talk a particular
species of language, not know any thing or
any person that does not carry the mark of the
coterie, and speak in a peculiar tone of voice.
To hold any conversation which deserves that
name is called being prosy;--to understand
any thing beyond the costume of life, pedantic.

Whatever vice or demoralization may exist
in character, providing it exist with what they
call good taste (that idol of their idolatry), is
varnished over. If not approved openly, it is
tacitly assented to, and allowed to pass as a
venial error; whereas whatever takes place
contrary to this _good taste_, though in itself
perfectly innocent, tending it may be to virtue
rather than vice, is insufferable--not to be
named _among them_; and unfits the offending
parties from communication with the Exclusives.
Indignation expressed at crime is voted
vulgar; any natural expression of the feelings,
ill-breeding; and right and wrong, in
short, consists in being, or not being, _one of
the set_. To their choice meetings children
dare not invite parents, or brothers and
sisters of one another, except under their seal
and sign-manual. The husbands and wives,
who are members of the association, are
invariably persons who have separate interests,
separate views, and agree only in this
one point, namely, in being a cloak for each
other's follies or vices.

It is to be hoped, and indeed may be asserted
with truth, that many are ensnared to
tread this Circean circle who are in ignorance
of what it leads to; who see in it only
a brilliant phantasm of pleasure and of pride;
an _ignis fatuus_ that pleases their fancy; but
which terminates too frequently in leading
them on, till some entanglement of fortune,
or virtue, levels them with its worse members;
and from which it is a mercy indeed if
they ever escape.

An open defiance of received laws and customs,
a coarse career of vicious pleasure, a
bold avowal of any illegitimate pursuit, would
startle and astound many a wavering mind;
but the slow-sapping mischief of this love of
exclusiveness, the airy indifference with which
all the safeguards of conduct are broken
down, the cruel heartlessness which lies concealed
under apparently indifferent actions,
the artful weaning of the mind from all fixed
principle of conduct, these are the means
they use; and which, step by step, adulterate
the character, indurate the heart, pollute the
judgment, and are subversive of every thing
that is dignified or amiable in human nature.
It is precisely because the evil works so insidiously,
and under such a variety of masks
(under none more than a placid _insouciance_),
a fortuitous occurrence of accidents--that the
veil should be drawn aside, and that it should
be set forth in its native deformity and danger.




CHAPTER V.

A RURAL EXCURSION.


A brilliant water party had been arranged
among the exclusives, to go to Richmond,
merely to view the scene; it consisted of the
Glenmores, Baskervilles, Lady Tenderden,
Comtesse Leinsengen, Lady Tilney, Lord Boileau,
Sir William Temple, Lord De Chere,
Mr. Winyard, Mr. Spencer Newcomb, Comte
Leinsengen, and a few other young men of
their set.

When the day arrived, Lord Glenmore told
his wife that as he was on a committee of the
House, he should not be able to accompany
her.

"Then I would far rather not go myself."

"Do not be so childish," he said; "for
as we could not, at all events, be together,
you might just as well be at Richmond
as here; and the day is beautiful, so that I
hope you will have a pleasant excursion."
Lady Glenmore sighed, and hung her head,
while a tear came into her eye.

"What is the matter, love?--Has any
thing vexed you?--is it any thing which I
can remedy?--You know you have only to
speak, and your wishes are my laws." He
pressed her fondly to his breast as he said
this, and she replied:

"Nothing; nothing vexes me, except that
we are hardly ever together, as it seems to
me--or never, but when in public; and I long
for the time when we shall be in the country,
and that all our occupations will be mutual;
when you are not with me, I find more pleasure
in music, or in reading, than in going to
parties: for nobody cares for me; and I am
sure I return the compliment."

"Nay, my sweet Georgina, this is really
nonsense. Are you not courted and paid attention
to by every one in the most marked
manner?"

"Do not mistake me," she replied; "I
have not explained what I mean. As to outward
attentions of politeness, oh! yes, I receive
them in abundance; but what I intended
to make you understand is, that the
things I take interest in, and the pleasures I
have in view, seem so entirely different from
those of the generality of the set I live in,
that there is nothing left for me to say; and
I often observe that when I do speak, my conversation
is either laughed at, or they stare at
me as if they did not believe I was serious."

Lord Glenmore smiled, and loved his innocent
little wife a thousand times the more for
her unsophisticated sweetness; nevertheless,
as he was likely always to have a part to play
in the great world, he could not help wishing
that his wife should be able, without putting
any force upon her inclinations, to do so likewise.
He therefore said, and speaking rather
more seriously than he had done: "Retain
always, dearest Georgina, this youth and
purity of character; but, for my sake, learn,
my love, to endure an intercourse with others
who may be of a less pure nature than yourself;
but who are yet, from your situation
and circumstances, likely to be those with
whom you must naturally associate: to please
me, then, my dearest Georgina, begin from
to-day: put on all your smiles, and let me
hear that you are the envy of the women, and
the admiration of the men. Remember, love,
to _please me_."

"Any thing to please you," she replied;
and she decorated herself with more than
usual care. Just as her toilette was about to be
completed, Lord Glenmore entered her room
with a quantity of lilies of the valley. "Here,"
he said, "I have brought you your favourite
flowers; wear them, love, and let their fragrance
remind you of the donor." All this
lover-like attention enchanted the person to
whom it was addressed, and her eyes sparkled
with unwonted brilliancy, and her cheeks were
tinged with the glow of pleasure as she fastened
her _bouquet_ in her breast. Lord Glenmore,
proud of such a wife, as well he might
be, handed her into her carriage, and she
drove to Lady Tilney's, where the party were
to assemble to go to Whitehall stairs.

When she entered the room she found nobody
yet arrived; a servant made Lady Tilney's
apology, saying she should be dressed
shortly. Having played a few airs on the
piano-forte, she took up a novel, and was
busily employed in its pages when Mr. Leslie
Winyard was announced. Lady Glenmore felt
embarrassed in his presence, she knew not
why, but there was something of fear and
flutter that came over her whenever he approached,
which she could not command.
She arose and curtseyed; and then, as though
she had payed him too marked a distinction,
she remained awkwardly standing, as though
she had taken that position by accident--not
in honour of him.

All this was not unobserved by Mr. Winyard.
He was too well practised in the ways
of women's hearts not to read her's at a
glance. At least he occasioned emotion, no
matter what emotion. He was not to be seen
with indifference--that was enough for him;
and he despaired not of turning it to his own
advantage. This advantage, however, was
not, in the present instance, to be obtained by
a _coup de main_; and assuming an air of polite,
but frigid _nonchalance_, he accosted Lady Glenmore
with an expression of surprise at finding
her the first-arrived person; and then examined
one of the miniatures which hung in a
glass cabinet. Lady Glenmore soon recovered
her composure, and entered into conversation
by asking some of those questions which are
merely the opening of conversation. "Yes,
I like music," said Mr. Winyard, in answer
to one of her questions; "it is one of the very
few things which is worth giving one's-self any
trouble about. I once learned to sing; the
only thing I ever learned." Lady Glenmore
laughed; and as her own ingenuous manner
returned, she evinced that propensity to being
amused by the present moment, which is so
natural and so pleasing in youth.

"Will you do me the honour to sing a
duet with me?"

"Oh! certainly," she said; and turning
over some music which lay scattered on the
instrument, she added, "Oh! here is that
delightful little duet, '_Sempre piu_' which,
though not new, is always charming." Mr.
Leslie Winyard had a sort of shuddering at
the idea that, notwithstanding her general
elegance, she might excruciate his ears by an
open English pronunciation, and a drawl by
way of sentiment; but he had embarked in
the danger, and fortunately there was no one
in the way to hear if his own talent should be
marred. He therefore courageously opened
the music leaf; and Lady Glenmore, having
touched a few chords, gave an assurance that
better things were in store. Nor did she disappoint
the promise; her sweet, rich-toned
voice had been tutored by Italian taste, and
swelled or sunk to every intonation, with a
delicacy of feeling which could not be surpassed;
the _sempre piu t'amo_ was uttered in
the purest enunciation of the language; and
Mr. Leslie Winyard thought, if it were only
addressed to him, it would be a triumph, which
the world he had lived in had not yet afforded.
Lady Tilney entered the room while they were
yet singing.

"I am glad to find you have not been
tired," she said, "waiting for me. I beg you
a thousand pardons, Lady Glenmore; but
really I had so many things to do to-day--notes,
those terrible time destroyers; and then
the last number of the Edinburgh Review, together
with Mr. Kirchoffer's last work, have
so entirely occupied me, I totally forgot how
the hours flew past, till Argenbeau told me
that you were arrived. However, I hope you
find the instrument in good order. Mr. Winyard
sings like an angel; and I make no doubt,"
(looking at him, to ask how far she was right
in the assertion) "Lady Glenmore does so
likewise."

Mr. Winyard said, "I assure you, Lady
Tilney, _que voilà ce que l'on appelle chanter_,"
indicating Lady Glenmore with a movement
of his head, "I had no idea any thing not
of the Land of Song could sing in that manner."

"Well, really, you astonish me; why Lady
Glenmore keeps all her perfections to herself!
But she must really be drawn out, and not
suffered to hide her talents in obscurity."

At this moment Lady Tenderden and the
Baskervilles entered, and shortly after the
remainder of the company. "Well, it is time
we should be gone, if we mean to see Richmond,"
observed Mr. Spencer Newcomb,
"though I believe _eating_ Richmond is fully
as interesting, and candle-light at any time
is better worth seeing than the sun-light;
are you not of my opinion, Lady Glenmore?"
He addressed himself in preference to her,
because he thought she was new enough to
be astonished, and astonishment was an homage
paid to his power which he well knew
he could not extract from any of the rest of
the company.

"Both are good," replied Lady Glenmore,
"in their proper season."

"A philosophical answer!" cried Sir William;
"you did not expect that, did you,
Newcomb?"

"No, it is too wise for me," he said, "for
it leaves me nothing to say--it is a truism;
_messieurs et mesdames, je vous avertie_, that as
I do not like the evening fogs of the river I
cannot postpone my departure. Lord Baskerville,
Mr. Winyard, will you come with me?
I have a _voiture a quatre places_, and any
lady may come that likes." Mr. Leslie
Winyard bowed and whispered Lady Glenmore,
"would she go?" Lady Tenderden
whispered her on the other side, "by all
means go, my dear Lady Glenmore, and I will
arrange my party in your carriage."

Lady Tenderden's advice was not to be
slighted, and Lady Glenmore accordingly accepted
Mr. Leslie Winyard's offered arm, and
followed Comtesse Leinsengen, who treating
her as nobody, as she was generally wont to
do every one whom she dared, she entered
her carriage and drove off. At Whitehall-stairs
they found their boat waiting, the best
barge, the most knowing bargemen, and all
things in exquisite order--they take their
places, and, a band of music following, glide
down the stream, and are, or appear to be, in
the most harmonious of humours.

"What is become of Glenmore to-day?"
asked Lord Gascoigne.

"I am sorry to say he was obliged to be
on a committee, and I feel so lonely without
him, half my pleasure is gone," replied Lady
Glenmore. The men looked at one another--the
ladies tittered; there was a pause, and
the speaker felt sadly embarrassed, she knew
not why. Lady Tenderden whispered to her
as they leaned over the boat-side:

"That was a very injudicious speech of
your's, my dear; you must learn not to _affiché_
these tendernesses; for if you really feel them
nobody cares, and people in general only imagine
you affect them by way of being singular."

Poor Lady Glenmore made no answer;
but was again convinced that she should
never like a society in which she was to be
so perfectly unnatural. Mr. Leslie Winyard,
who saw at a single glance the truth and
freshness of Lady Glenmore's character, was
certain that it would not do to attempt to gain
her good graces by any common-place mode
of attack, such as flattery of the person, or
intoxicating representations of power, dissipation,
and pleasure. He therefore took
an opportunity, when the rest of the party
were engaged in their own conversation, to
approach Lady Glenmore, and having found
a seat next to her, he commenced a discourse
which he conceived would be more to her
taste. Music afforded him an opening; it
was a subject on which he spoke elegantly
and well, and she listened with pleased attention.

"After all," he observed, "where science
and taste have done their utmost to produce
perfection, and without these guides certainly
nothing will do; even after they have lent
their assistance, there is a third ingredient
which is _given_ only, and cannot be _acquired_,
without which there will ever remain a flatness,
an _ineffectiveness_, if I may so speak,
which renders the whole vapid and inefficient--I
mean feeling; and there, indeed,
you must know, Lady Glenmore, that you
are not wanting." He fixed his eyes on her
with an expression which made her blush;
but she replied smiling:

"How can _you_ know that, Mr. Winyard?"

"Did I not hear you a short time ago sing
'_Sempre piu t'amo_'?"

"Oh," she replied, "you judge by that?"

"And can I appeal to a more convincing
proof of what I assert? But if I needed any
other proof, surely the words, and the look
which accompanied the words, when you expressed
your regret at Lord Glenmore not
being of the party to-day, would be an
undoubted corroboration of the fact."

"Oh, that was natural," she said; "it
would have been odd could I have done
otherwise. But real feeling is a much deeper
seated quality than can be judged of by singing
a song, or a passing impulse, and I do
not own that you can know any thing about
me or my feelings."

"Perhaps not," replied Mr. Leslie Winyard,
looking grave and humble; "may it be
my good fortune to know more of these, and
to have the honour and advantage of improving
my acquaintance with you."--Here a
louder laugh than was usual among the fastidious
in manners, interrupted this _tête-à-tête_;
"will you not allow us to benefit by the wit?"
asked Mr. Winyard.

"Oh," said Lady Tenderden, "it is only
that Sir William Temple fell asleep, and asked,
when he was awoke, for some more maids
of honour."--"To be sure," he said, "what
does one go to Richmond for, but to eat those
exquisite compositions. If all maids of honour
were like them, I am sure their race would
be more in vogue than it is. I would give a
hundred or two to have the receipt, for notwithstanding
that I have brought my cook
disguised _en valet de chambre_ a thousand
times, he never could find out the secret;
neither has he been able, with all his art, to
produce any precise _fac-simile_."

"Ah!" exclaimed Lord Gascoigne, "that
is the true spirit of philanthropy; a hundred
or two for a receipt to make cheesecakes!
while we have such men in the state we need
not be under any apprehension that the arts
and sciences will fail."

"Yes, arts and sciences, my Lord Gascoigne;
for I affirm that the pleasures of the
table require one to be an adept, both in
order to procure and preserve them in perfection.
Who will deny that the cultivation
and use of the animals, and vegetables, and
elements, that are employed, do not include
all these, not to speak of the _main d'œuvre_."

"I am not disputing the fact," said Lord
Gascoigne; "why did you address yourself to
me? On the contrary, I am so well convinced
of it, that I pay my cook a hundred a year:
but the rascal threatens to leave me if I do
not raise his wages."

"I cannot be surprised at that," said Lord
Baskerville, "for I give mine two, and he is
only a second-rate performer."

"It is vastly extravagant," cried Lady
Tilney; "however, one need not do it if one
does not chuse; and, after all, it is not too
much to pay a man to become a salamander."

"Oh," cried the Comtesse Leinsengen,
"_ils son fait au feu ces gens-là_, they are good
for nothing else, and if you were not to yield
to them, you would have them for half de
money; but you are all _des dupes_ in England.
You think the more you pay, de grander you
are, that is the truth."

"Well, my dear Comtesse," rejoined Lord
Baskerville, "that is all very well to say, but
I am certain that you never would get any
body to serve you if you did not pay him
well; and I must declare that I had rather
give a hundred or two more to my cook, than
to any other servant in my house; for one's
whole domestic comfort depends upon one's
cook, don't you think so, Temple?"

"I was always of opinion that you were a
wise man, and I am now confirmed in that
opinion. Most indubitably one's cook is the
great nucleus upon which one's whole existence,
mental and physical, depends; for if
you eat of a bad greasy ragoût, the _physique_
immediately suffers, and then bilious hypochondria
ensues, and one's friends are the
victims of one's indigestion; and all the economy
of life, in short, goes wrong, if there is a
failure in that department."

"Nobody has ever denied," observed Mr.
Spencer Newcomb, "_que le bonheur est dans
l'estomac_, and that happiness depends very
much on what one eats--and what one
eats depends upon the cook. I hold it to be
an incontrovertible maxim, _que le bonheur des
bonheurs_ is to have a _cordon bleu_ at one's
command--even the ladies will agree with
me."

"Certainly," said Lady Baskerville, "I account
it to be one of the requisites of life."

"Yes," rejoined Mr. Winyard; "for a
lady ought to appreciate the beauty of every
thing, even of a _poulet santé aux truffes_; and
though I cannot endure a woman to have
what is vulgarly called a good appetite--a
sort of beef and cabbage voraciousness--I like
her to know the various flavours and high-wrought
refinements of the palate. Indeed,
I am sure she is always vulgar if she does
not. But here, we are nearly at the landing-place;
and now let us hope to put our theories
in practice, and find in this _rural_ retreat
a change of viands to recreate and stimulate
our somewhat palsied palates."

As the ladies were gathering up their
shawls and reticules, Lady Glenmore stooped
down to arrange a part of her dress, and the
lilies of the valley her husband had given her
fell into the water. She made an exclamation,
and attempted to catch them, but a
breeze bore them beyond her reach. "Oh
my nosegay! I would not lose it for the
world," she cried.

Mr. Leslie Winyard looking in her face, and
seeing that she was eager in her wish to recover
the flowers, hastily darted from another
part of the boat; and in making an effort to
catch them, lost his balance, and fell into the
water. As they were literally on the shore,
there was no sort of danger, besides that
of getting a ducking; but he thought it
might avail him something in Lady Glenmore's
favour: nor was he mistaken. Seeing
him floundering in the water, she cried out,
"for God's sake save his life!" and while
he made the most of the awkwardness of his
situation, he kept brandishing the lilies with
one hand, and would not suffer any body to
touch them till he delivered them safely to
her. She was exceedingly touched by this
effort to oblige her, and for the rest of the
evening, after he had made a fresh toilette,
he reaped the rewards of his gallantry, by
finding that Lady Glenmore listened to him
with a kind of favourable impression, that
he could scarcely have hoped to inspire her
with, had not fortune thus favoured him.

During dinner nothing was talked of but
the merits of a Richmond party:--"there is
surely nothing in the world more beautiful,"
said Mr. Newcomb, "than the view of Richmond
Hill; it is the only _riante_ landscape in
England; a perfect Claude; and for my part,
I never desire to go farther in quest of the
picturesque--it is quite a _gentle_ scene; no
horrors, no rugged rocks or torrents; but a
sweet, soft, sylvan composition."

"Enlivened too," observed Sir William
Temple, "by stage-coaches, and mail-coaches,
and coaches of all sorts, in short; without
which I hold all views to be very wearisome
things _à la longue_."

"Only made for the eyes of the vulgar, depend
upon it," was Lord Baskerville's observation.
"Except during the hunting season,
the country is hateful; but one may bear a
row to Richmond, especially in such company,"--and
he bowed to Comtesse Leinsengen.

"The country is all very well," she rejoined,
"in a _grande chateau bien remplie de tout ce
qu'il y a de mieux en fait de société_; but it
makes me shudder to think of being in one of
your provinces, in a house in the middle of a
shut-up park, with a neighbour or two _pour
tout bien_; no no, I am perished with _ennui_
but to think of it."

"It makes me shudder too," said Lady
Baskerville, smiling at the Comtesse Leinsengen's
broken English; "but, in fact, it
is what nobody does now-a-days; either the
real or the pretended incapacity on the score
of fortune for living at the country-seats, as
they used to be called, gets rid of all that
sort of thing. People live very much now
as they used to do in France, I am told, when
Paris was the only place in that country which
any body lived in."

"Yes," said Mr. Spencer Newcomb, "and
as long as the people don't find out that their
landlords forsake them, and rack them for
their money, which they spend any where
rather than in doing them any good, it is very
agreeable not to be bored with that sort of
useful virtuous life. Long may they continue
to administer to our pleasures--they ought
certainly to be made for nothing else; but,
unfortunately, there came a time in France
when these things were all changed, and the
vulgars took it into their heads that they were
to have their day; and off went heads, and
on went caps of liberty, and all things were
turned upside down, as every body knows.
I wonder now how Lord Baskerville would
like to turn groom, and rub down his own
horses!"

"Ha! ha! ha!" was echoed around.

"So long as you keep a good whip hand,
and de rein in both, you will not be in any danger,"
cried Comtesse Leinsengen; "you have
only to keep down _de canaille_. What sinifie
all these schools of learning? dey are the most
terrible nonsense; good for nothing but to
turn the people's heads, and make them think
themselves wiser than their masters; we do
not do so in my country. When they learn to
sing, they only learn _one note_, so that no
single person is independent of anoder, and
yet they make excellent concerts; these sort
of people should be always kept dat way, so
you see dat keeps all quiet, and the country
goes on from one age to another all de same."

"Capital," said Winyard, "that is worth
putting in print."

"Oh, I am quite of another opinion,"
cried Lady Tilney; "you must pardon me;
but I think that every thing which has not
freedom for its basis, must be wrong; let
every body have a fair chance of becoming
something; above all, let the light of learning
shine every where, in every thing; there will
always be ways and means of keeping people
in their several stations. A country may
have all the blessings of liberty, and yet a
certain set may exist who shall have a superiority
of its own, move in a sphere of its
own, and be kept quite apart from the vulgar
crowd; there is always a way of managing
these things. I uphold liberty and literature;
but that is not to say, that your authors
and your musicians are to mix with certain
societies--quite the contrary. The liberty
of the latter will always keep its ground against
the intrusion of the former, don't you think so,
Sir William?"

"I think, Lady Tilney, that whatever you
say must be right; and when you command,
I feel always inclined to reply, as some body,
I forget who, did to the Queen of France, _si
c'est possible c'est déjà fait, si c'est impossible
ça ce fera_."

"I have always thought," rejoined Mr.
Spencer Newcomb, "that that speech ought
to be the truest that ever was uttered, for
it is exactly the sort of thing a lady would
like to have said, and I am sure it is the
most ingenious that ever was contrived." A
walk was now proposed, previous to which
the ladies withdrew to the drawing-room.

"Well," said Lady Tenderden, "I think
we have had a charming day, do you not Lady
Glenmore?"

"Very much so," she replied, "and if
only----."

"I will finish the phrase for you--if only
Lord Glenmore was here--now my dear, I
thought I had warned you not to indulge in
that infantine habit of saying always what
you think. You cannot conceive what strange
ideas men attach to these sort of declarations;
they are apt to suppose it is a hint to them to
make love to you."

"Impossible!" said Lady Glenmore, colouring.

"Oh, you do not yet know the world, my
dear Lady Glenmore. Be advised at first, and
then afterwards act for yourself."

"I must beg of you, ladies," interrupted
Comtesse Leinsengen, coming up to them, "to
patronize a little _modiste_ who is newly
established, and whom I take under my special
protection. She has all her patterns from
Paris--dey are of the _premier goût_, and have
that particular mark of distinction about
them, which dose who are copied from the
_feuilles des modes_ never so attain. Mademoiselle
Dumesnil has promised me never to
sell certain things but to certain people;
so that one is quite sure of not seeing _le double_
of one's own dress on Mrs. Hoffer, or Lady
Delafont, which is quite sufficient to make
one fall into a syncope, and put one in bad
humour for de whole season."

The Ladies smiled, agreed with her, and
promised compliance with her wishes. "Mademoiselle
Dumesnil's story," continued Comtesse
Leinsengen, "_feroit un roman_; it is
quite touching, and" (she added in a whisper,
as the gentlemen entered the room), "its
hero, _le voilà_," pointing to Mr. Leslie Winyard;
then in a low voice she proceeded to
give the whole particulars to the two Ladies,
Glenmore and Tenderden, who sat next to
her.

The gentlemen now expressed their wish
to know whether the ladies would not profit
by the beauty of the evening to walk out,
and the measure being agreed upon, the party
was so arranged that Lady Glenmore fell to
the lot of Mr. Leslie Winyard, and much as
she now felt averse to accept his arm, after
the particulars she had just heard from Comtesse
Leinsengen, it was impossible for her
to refuse without incurring, as she thought,
Lady Tenderden's animadversions. Lady
Glenmore's silence, however, as they walked
along, attracted her companion's particular
notice. Something, he conceived, must have
occurred, to change her manner so completely
since dinner; but Mr. Leslie Winyard was too
well versed in intrigue to augur from this
circumstance any thing unfavourable to his
wishes, because he knew that to have made
an impression _quelconque_, was the first step
towards attaining his end.

Determined, nevertheless, to ascertain the
reason of this alteration in Lady Glenmore's
manner, he very cautiously, but very adroitly,
contrived to find out that something had been
said which she conceived was to his disadvantage;
and he could be at no loss to guess of
what nature it was, for the affair in which
his name had been mixed up, in Comtesse
Leinsengen's conversation, was of too recent
a date, and too _marquante_, to have escaped the
memories even of that thoughtless circle--it
was, in short, his last.

With this just apprehension of the fact,
therefore, he turned the conversation upon
the subject of scandal, which he deprecated
bitterly; and, as if instancing the effects of it
in regard to a person intimately known to
himself, gave a totally different, but very plausible,
interpretation of the exact story, which
Lady Glenmore had heard detailed half an
hour before by Comtesse Leinsengen.

Lady Glenmore had listened to this artful
language with considerable interest and
surprise. From the generosity of her nature,
she felt much pleasure in thinking that
the evil she had heard, and which made her
uneasy even to be in Mr. Leslie Winyard's
society, was totally without foundation. Her
manner, therefore, gradually relaxed in rigour
towards him; she seemed to have suddenly
recovered her spirits, and her conversation
flowed naturally without any constraint.

The moment the party returned from their
walk she flew up to Lady Tenderden, and
referring to the previous conversation of Comtesse
Leinsengen, repeated that which she
had just heard from Mr. Leslie Winyard, and
which she conceived to be his interpretation
of his own story; commenting, as she related
it, on the injurious effects of speaking evil of
any person without a thorough knowledge of
the fact. Lady Tenderden foresaw, that were
all this carried back to Lord Glenmore, many
impediments would arise in fitting Lady Glenmore
for their exclusive circle, and bringing
her down to a moral level with themselves;
she therefore said, after a minute's pause, "I
make no doubt the Comtesse Leinsengen has
been exceedingly misinformed; but at the
same time the less that is said of these matters
is always best, on every account; and as Mr.
Leslie Winyard is my very particular friend, I
shall esteem it a favour, my dear Lady Glenmore,
that you do not mention this idle
story to Lord Glenmore, who might conceive
some prejudice against him, which
would make me very unhappy. It is, in
fact, of no consequence whatever; but when
things of that nature pass through various
mouths, they accumulate a consequence in
their passage which they have not in themselves;
and therefore promise me, dear
Lady Glenmore, that you will not mention
this matter to any one; besides," she added,
looking very mysterious, "you know Lord
Glenmore's great interests may be much
affected by the Leinsengens; and the knowledge
of her having retailed that sort of
story, and retailed it under a mistaken
point of view, might produce some coolness
between them; for you know Lord Glenmore
is vastly fond of Mr. Leslie Winyard."

Lady Glenmore did _not_ know this, and
hardly comprehended any part of the speech;
in truth, how should she? But she remembered
her husband's having recommended her to
take Lady Tenderden's advice, and therefore
she determined so to do in the present instance.

Shortly after this conversation, it was put to
the vote whether the party should return to
town by land or by water; and with the
exception of Princess Leinsengen and Lord
Baskerville, who preferred a close carriage
for fear of damp, the rest agreed to go as
they had come. It was soon quite night;
but a brilliant moon made the water look very
beautiful; and the soft language of Mr. Winyard,
as he sat by the side of Lady Glenmore
in the boat, fashioned in its phrase to the taste
of his hearer, appeared to her in unison with
the scene, and she thought him the only one
of the party who was at all amusing, or had
given a colouring of any interest to the hours
she had passed with them.

Arrived at Whitehall, Lady Tenderden proposed
their adjourning to her house, where
supper was prepared; but Lady Glenmore,
uneasy at a longer absence from home and
her husband's society, determined for once to
be firm in her refusal; and stepping into
her carriage, which awaited her, drove at
once home. On her arrival there, however,
she was doomed to sustain an unexpected
disappointment, as she found a note from
Lord Glenmore, dated from the House; in
which he told her not to be uneasy if he were
late, for that the business of the morning was
likely to be followed by a protracted debate on
an important question. Lady Glenmore sighed
over this note as she perused it; and, tired
with the day's excursion, yet not sufficiently
composed for rest, she experienced that listlessness
of mind, which admits not of any
active exertion, and yet affords no satisfactory
contemplation whereon to dwell.

Lord Glenmore's attention happened to be
at this moment directed to a high post under
government, which it was more than probable
he would attain. But could he have dreamt
that in this pursuit he was neglecting the
duties of private life, and casting forth an
inexperienced young person, unprotected, amid
all the dangers of a pleasure-loving world,
he would have left all else to guide her
through the perils to which he now so frequently
left her exposed. How often does it
happen, in various instances, that in the blindness
of human wishes, we hurry to the goal of
our desires--even those which we deem innocent
and praiseworthy; but which, when suffered
to lead us on, without a reference to a
higher power, never fail to _mislead_, and prove
fallacious when obtained. Yes, this is that
self-pride of reason, which, confiding too much
in its own merits, and not acting under the
reliance of a superintending Providence, even
when on the point of realizing its fondest
hopes, finds it has grasped at a shadow; and
to an ideal good, sacrificed a permanent happiness.

Had Lord Glenmore paused to reflect, and
had recourse to that unerring light, which
never dazzles to betray--his steps would
have been guided by unfailing wisdom, and
he would have found his chief happiness in
his chief duty; whereas he pursued the phantom
ambition; he did not consider that the
necessary consequence which must follow an
official occupation, was his leaving his young
wife without a natural protector, amid scenes
that were any thing but safe; and he was
desirous that she, too, should play her part,
and by those graces and influences which
have such sway over the destinies of men and
of empires, take an interest and acquire a
power in that vaulting game of ambition in
which he himself delighted to engage. He
considered not how often he must leave her
through the day, and the greater part of the
night, to run this hazardous career, at an
age when caution sleeps and passions are
awake, and in the midst of a set which, though
certainly not wholly devoid of some unblemished
characters, was yet, generally speaking,
in its whole tendency perilous to the
pure and domestic virtues--a woman's only
true glory.

Yet on this precipice was Lady Glenmore
placed, without one real friend to whom
she could look for genuine advice or succour.
Her mother's (Lady Melcomb) absence from
town prevented that natural tie, and had she
been there it would have proved the business of
the exclusives to have prevented that free and
happy intercourse, both on the principle of
not allowing any aged person to mar the
brilliancy of their set, as well as that of excluding
all those who might see through the
drift of the society. On Lady Melcomb's part
it was too early in the day to have any suspicion
of the work of mischief which was carrying
on to separate her from her daughter,
and thus was Lady Glenmore like a lovely
lamb amidst ravening wolves.

Scarcely had she been received amongst
them, when Mr. Leslie Winyard, being at the
moment _desœuvré_, conceived that she was just
put in his way as a fit play-thing for the hour,
and without the least scruple he determined
she should swell the list of his conquests, already
as numerous as those of Don Giovanni
in all lands. He took no pains to conceal this
design from any one save herself, and his intentions
served many of the set as a topic of
conversation, a fit subject for betting on:
"how would Glenmore take the thing;
would he be a wise man or a fool--put on the
cap which fitted him with a good grace, or
make grimaces at it?" Such is the license
with which the most serious delinquencies
were talked over, and though when set down
on paper they may seem exaggerated, yet
certainly the fact is not in the least so; only
people start at things and actions when called
by their right names, which under the title
of venial errors, youthful indiscretions, and the
sanction of custom and habit, are certainly
tolerated, if not commended; _tacitly_ approved,
if not openly avowed. Ought not such a
desperate system to be analyzed? Ought not
language to pourtray in its strongest terms
those deeds and those manners which, under
the semblance of polite terms, and fictitious
representation, and deceptive elegancies,
pass current as being harmless or indifferent.

Let those whose hearts have bled on the
shrine of fashion and of _ton_--who have mourned
the loss of all that was valuable in character,
or beautiful in mental existence, sacrificed
to the insatiable appetite of pleasure,
the degrading occupations of frivolous pursuit,--let
_them_ say if colours can be too deep,
or language too strong, to paint so destructive
an evil as that of the whole false, futile
system of the exclusiveness of _ton_.

Lady Glenmore was evidently one of those
persons marked out to become its victim, and
when the character of Mr. Leslie Winyard is
taken into account, as being the man who
attempted above all others to lead her to her
ruin, it cannot be wondered at, circumstanced
as she was, that the pit of degradation yawned
at her feet. Mr. Winyard was one of those
who to the gentlest manners united the hardest
of hearts: he had not, perhaps, always
merited such a description; but the being who
lives entirely for pleasure, becomes gradually
hardened to every natural sentiment, and selfishness
is the invariable consequence of a life
of idle dissipation. From selfishness springs
every other evil, and as it is the meanest of all
principles of action, when considered in the
baldness of the term, so it is, perhaps, the
most common, and the one which above all
others no person will like to avow--no, not
even Mr. Leslie Winyard.

Yet he was a man who, after having by
every sort of riot and debauchery ruined
himself, proceeded to ruin his own mother
and sister, bringing the grey hairs of the
one to the grave with sorrow, and leaving the
other to work out her existence in a situation
unfitting her rank, but far more honourable
and desirable than the one he filled; yet
this was a man, the beauty of whose personal
appearance, the refinement of whose manners,
the powers of whose understanding
and charm of fascination, were calculated
to destroy every innocent mind; and it was
difficult to arm against such a powerful
enemy--a very Proteus in the power of
becoming all things at pleasure, and suiting
himself precisely to the taste and habits of
the victim whom he was insidiously endeavouring
to undermine.

What could protect an unsuspecting,
youthful mind against such an enemy?
Nothing but religion; nothing but that habitual
looking for wisdom, where alone it
may be found; and perhaps, Lady Glenmore
was in this only security fatally defective;
she was good and pure, in as much as
human nature can be said to be so. And
how totally valueless this goodness is, without
it rests on a firmer basis, may be
seen in her, as in every other person to
whom the same vital want attaches: for her
character was not built on that rock which
when the floods come, and the storm beats,
will remain unmoved by them: she had yet
the greatest of all lessons to learn, not to
depend on _self_.




CHAPTER VI.

RETROSPECTION.


When Lady Hamlet Vernon drew Lord
Albert D'Esterre aside, at Lady Tilney's supper
party, it was, he conceived, with an intention
of explaining to him the words contained
in her note at Restormel alluding to Lady
Adeline Seymour--and he was confirmed in
this idea by the violent agitation which her
manner betrayed, although she strove to retain
that composure which the circumstances of
the time and place particularly demanded.
For several minutes after they had sat down,
she seemed labouring for breath; and Lord
Albert, notwithstanding his own anxiety
and impatience felt exceedingly for her distress.

"My dear Lady Hamlet Vernon," he said,
"I beseech you be not thus agitated; remember,
whatever you have to say, however
painful it may be to me to hear, I am certain
that it must be from friendly motives
alone that you make such communication,
and I must always feel grateful to you for
your intention; but keep me no longer in
suspense I entreat, for I am prepared for
whatever you may have to tell me."

"I have nothing to tell you, Lord Albert."

"What do you mean? what, can you possibly
intend to disappoint me; and, having so
cruelly excited my feelings, cast them back
upon me to prey upon themselves? No, I
never can believe you so inconsequent; so
very--"

"Stay, Lord Albert, and before you condemn,
hear me.--It is true I was on the
point of betraying a trust--of revealing a
secret--of becoming _really dishonourable_--for
what? for the sole purpose of befriending
you--for the sole purpose of snatching _you_
from a danger which it was then time to
prevent your falling into; but since that moment
is past for ever--since it is now in vain
that I should prove useful to you by being
false to another, my lips must for ever be
sealed."

"Strange and unaccountable mystery!
What, you will not tell me--you will not endeavour
to warn me against a danger which
hangs over me--is this friendship? How _can
you_ know that the time is past for pointing
out to me such danger? How can _you_ be so
thoroughly acquainted with the events of my
life--the secrets of my heart, as first to imagine
my fate _was_ in your hands, and then
suddenly be equally well assured it is so no
longer? No, I cannot conceive there is any
friendship in such conduct."

"Ah," said Lady Hamlet Vernon, sighing,
"I see you are like all your sex;
you receive the devotion of a heart as a
thing of course; you take into no consideration
the pain, the remorse I felt, at the
idea of becoming false to a trust for your
sake, when I thought that by so doing I
might save you from misfortune. And now
that I tell you the time is gone by when I
might possibly have been of use, even by the
sacrifice of my own integrity, you still wish
for that sacrifice, although it can avail you
nothing:--is this generous?" Lord Albert
felt confused; he was even moved by the look,
the air, the words of Lady Hamlet Vernon,
but still the disappointment wrung his heart,
and jealousy, with every other feeling, goaded
him on to press for a disclosure of the
secret.

"I am not ungrateful, indeed I am not; I
feel deeply the kind interest you take in me;
but if that interest does not sleep, or rather
if it is not extinguished, I still plead to be
made acquainted with a circumstance so very
nearly affecting my welfare; and when I say
that your disclosing it to me would be like
keeping it in another casket, surely, surely
you will not deny me."

"In this respect, my dear Lord Albert,
I alone can be the judge, and even at the
risk of losing your good opinion, or rather
of losing your friendship for the time being,
I must persist in remaining silent." There
was a long pause, which was at last interrupted
by Lady Hamlet Vernon resuming the conversation.

"Whatever may be your opinion of me, I
must, ere our intercourse altogether ceases,
touch upon one subject, which I believe to be
the prime object of your life, and that to which
all your views tend--I mean the noble career
which lies open to your ambition; may you
pursue it with unbounded success; but remember,
that you are not likely to do so if you have
any secondary interest to clog and drag you
back. If domestic troubles, at least domestic
cares, obtrude themselves upon your higher
aims, what a terrible hindrance to your plans
they must of necessity become. Think well, my
dear Lord Albert, of this--for _le roman de la
vie_ is soon over you know, but life itself goes
on to the end; and whatever women do, men
should look to that alone with a providing
care. We, who are creatures born to suffer
(at least all women who live as most women
do, the slaves of your sex), we indeed may
live upon that illusion, which destroys while
it delights; but it is not in your nature to do
so; public concerns--public applause--public
success--facts, not feelings, must fill up
the measure of a man's existence. Think,
then, what it is to have these great ends
marred, defeated, by some minor power that
corrodes and destroys in detail those thoughts,
those actions, which, if unshackled by petty
duties, would raise you to high consideration
and power; but if tied to a partner wholly
a stranger to your feelings and pursuits, she
must, however amiable in herself, ultimately
poison all your happiness."

Lord Albert had listened to Lady Hamlet
Vernon without a wish to interrupt her, and
with deep and fixed attention, painfully dwelt
upon every word she uttered; he could not
remain in ignorance of the drift of her words,
and they pierced him like swords, yet still he
remained silent.

"If," continued Lady Hamlet Vernon, "a
woman shares her husband's feelings, enters
into his views, goes along with him, not
merely from duty but from habit and inclination,
in all his interests, then indeed it is
possible such a woman might forward, and
not impede his prospects; but where habits,
principles, and prejudices, have all tended to
form a different character, and above all,
where bigotry has fastened chains on the
mind wholly destructive of any active or
useful pursuits, the probability is, that
wretchedness to both ensues." Lord Albert
no longer affected to misunderstand her, and
replied,

"Every thing you have said has been in
allusion to my approaching union with Lady
Adeline Seymour, an engagement you cannot
be ignorant of, as it has been well known to
the world in general for some years past.
Tell me, I adjure you tell me, to what principles,
to what habits do you allude? There
is enough in your words to startle and confound
me; but there lurks yet an unpronounced
sentence in your mind, which I now
implore you to declare. If, indeed, the least
regard for my happiness ever swayed your
breast, be explicit now, for my destiny perhaps
hangs on your open sincerity." Lord
Albert's thoughts were one chaos of uneasiness
and pain; jealousy had fired the train,
which set his whole being in a state of
anarchy, and he lost all command over himself--all
presence of mind, or capability of
sifting truth from falsehood. Poor human
reason, how weak is it even in the strongest
minds! when the passions are roused, who
dares to answer for himself, unless a higher
power assist him in his hour of need?

"Be composed, be calm," said Lady Hamlet
Vernon, "do nothing in haste; suffer me now
to drop this subject, and we may resume it at
a more favourable opportunity, when you
have considered fully the opinions I have now
expressed. All I wish you to remember is,
that when a man chooses a companion for
life, the chief thing to be considered is, not
her amiable qualities, but whether they are
of a kind which will assimilate with his. The
mere obedience which proceeds from duty,
will never satisfy a noble nature: no, it is the
devotion of a glowing heart which beats in
unison--a mind capable of sharing in the
plans and pursuits of an aspiring nature, unwarped
by prejudice, unobscured by fanaticism;
above all, a heart that is wholly and
undividedly its own."

Lord Albert, in listening to these words,
unconsciously compared the happiness of
being united to such a woman as the one he
now heard and beheld, to that of the pure
but infantine mind of Adeline Seymour. "Besides,"
he thought, "is she so pure? has no
preference for another, usurped the allegiance
which she owes wholly to me? Has George
Foley not become more necessary to her than
myself?" And while these imaginations, and
such as these passed rapidly to and fro in his
mind, his eyes were rivetted on Lady Hamlet
Vernon, whose exceeding beauty heightened
by the expression of an interest for himself
which he never before had seen so visibly betrayed,
made him say, in a tone and manner
not devoid of a similar feeling,

"Oh! Lady Hamlet Vernon, you who
can paint happiness so well--you who know
to distinguish, with such enchanting delicacy,
those shades of felicity which my warm imagination
has figured to be the charm of
married life, do not with a pertinacity unlike
yourself, withhold from me the secret on
which my fate depends, and either be my
guardian-angel or--"

"Hold, I beseech you in my turn; I have
already told you that I cannot fully impart all
I know--I may not, must not be explicit.
But this much I will reveal to you, providing
you swear to keep the secret, and never to
probe me further."

"Oh yes, I swear I will never betray so
generous a friend; I will never search further
into what you wish that I should not know."

"Well, then," Lady Hamlet Vernon replied,
after a pause, and trembling with excessive
emotion, "for the sake of the great, the deep
interest I feel for you, and have felt since
I first knew you, receive this pledge and
earnest of my friendship;" saying which, she
placed a ring in his hand, and added at the
same time in a low distinct voice, "you can
never be happy with Lady Adeline Seymour."

There are blows and shocks which strike at
the very vitality of existence--who has not
felt these before he has numbered many
years? and such was the power of these
words on Lord Albert, that he remained for
some minutes motionless; their sound vibrated
in his ear long after the sound itself
had ceased; for strange it is, though true, that
we can sometimes endure to think what we
scarcely can bear to hear uttered. In the one
case the thought seems not to be embodied in
reality; in the latter it has received existence,
and appears actually stamped with the seal of
certainty.

At length, however, he had summoned his
reason to his aid, and was about to speak further
to Lady Hamlet Vernon, when, interrupted
by the quick succeeding questions of many
of the company who were passing the room
in which they sat to go to supper, Lord
Albert offered his arm mechanically to Lady
Hamlet Vernon, and they followed in the
train of others. The noise and gaiety and
brilliancy of the scene could not for a moment
take Lord Albert out of himself; one idea,
one image engrossed him, and all the surrounding
persons and circumstances glanced
before his eye or came to his ear, with the
glitter and the buzz of undistinguishable lights
and sounds. He went through the forms of
the place and scene with the precision of an
automaton, and when the supper ended he
followed Lady Hamlet Vernon about like her
shadow, sometimes absorbed in the deepest
concentration of thought, sometimes endeavouring
to revert to their former conversation,
which had been so abruptly, and to
him so unopportunely broken off; eager to
renew its discussion, as well as to elicit a
disclosure (regardless of his solemn promise)
of that part of the subject on which she refused
all explanation.

In both, however, he wholly failed; and
having been obliged, although reluctantly,
to part from her for that time, he handed
Lady Hamlet Vernon to her carriage
and bent his way home. He felt it a
relief to be alone, in order to take a review
more collectedly of what was passing
in his own breast: but yet, when he commenced
the task, he found a contradiction of
thoughts and feelings which were so involved
that for a time he yielded to them,
and they alternately swayed him in opposite
directions, without his being able to come to
any decision.

On considering the length of time, and the
intimate footing on which Mr. Foley had lived
at Dunmelraise (notwithstanding the peculiar
circumstances in which he was placed, as the
son of Lady Dunmelraise's dearest friend, and
her own _protégé_), on recalling his descriptions
and praises of Lady Adeline when they
met at Restormel, he thought he saw a confirmation
of his worst fears. What, he asked
himself, could induce a young man to seek so
lonely and retired a situation but love? And
Lady Dunmelraise he thought must have approved
his views, or she would not have suffered
such an intimacy to subsist, even though
as her friend's child she received him under
her roof; at least it was evident that she
chose to give her daughter an opportunity of
turning her affections from that quarter to
which they had been originally directed. Adeline's
letters, too, so equable in their expression
of calm content, so lavish in Mr. Foley's
praise, so minute in her detail of his way of
thinking and manner of feeling, showed that
had she not been more than commonly interested
in him, she could not have thus busied
herself with analysing his character.

"It is clear," he said, "Adeline does not
love me; and her mother is no longer anxious
in consequence that our union should take
place!" While this idea prevailed he was desirous
immediately to break off the engagement;
formed a thousand plans for doing this,
in such a way as to appear disinterested and
honourable in their opinion; and worked himself
up to a belief, for the moment, that he
was only acting with that refinement and generosity
due to his own feelings as well as to
Lady Adeline's, by losing no time in putting
this resolve into execution, and then she
would be free. But for himself, would the
same step afford him the same advantage?
Would his heart be really free? were there
no strong ties that bound him to Adeline? no
habit of attachment formed in his breast,
though she had broken through the one, and apparently
could never have cherished the other?
Would he, in short, be free, though she were?
Could he turn the current of his affections
at once towards another object; could he accept
the heart, even were it her's to bestow,
of the person who had shewn such an interest
in his welfare; of one whose beauty was enhanced
by the deep expression which played
over her features--whose manners, talents,
character, were alike formed--could he make
her his wife? Again he paused at that title--it
had never been associated with any save
Adeline, and when coupled now with another,
it made him start from his own thoughts, as
though he were guilty in indulging them.

Struck at this idea, and with the conviction
of what would be the state of his own
mind were he indeed at once to let Lady
Adeline loose from her engagement, his feelings
and his reasonings took another course.

"Should I be justified," he asked himself,
"in the steps I am proposing, without further
proofs of Adeline's inconstancy? My surmises
perhaps have ground sufficient, but something
more than surmise is due to her. It is true,
I am told I shall never be happy with her,"
(and he shuddered as he repeated the words
to himself); "but I very much doubt if ever I
can be happy without her. My own conduct,
too, lately--what has it been? Has it not
carried with it proofs of coldness and neglect?
Why should I expect to receive that constant
and ardent devotion, which I have shewed no
anxiety to retain; and what, on my part, has
occasioned this passive indifference? Has it
not been a growing partiality for the society
of another--and was _this_ Adeline's fault?"
He dwelt on this idea for some moments, and
his self-reproaches were painful. Then again
he thought, allowing that all is as it was
between us, that she loves me in _her_ way,
and I her in mine, is that enough to constitute
lasting happiness? "_No, it is not._ I
should loathe the insipid homage of daily
duties pointedly fulfilled, and weary of a mind
which had not sufficient energy to think for
itself. If I saw that my wife did not enter,
from a similarity of tastes, into my occupations
and pursuits, I should feel no satisfaction
in her doing so to oblige me; and I certainly
have already observed, that Adeline's habits,
and even her principles, have led her to a life
of monotonous tranquillity and insipid cares."

And here again Lady Hamlet Vernon's words
recurred to him with tremendous power.
Would it not then, after all, be more noble to
set her free from an engagement, which
would fail in producing the happiness
that they both had been led to expect? He
mused with painful intensity as his thoughts
rested on this idea; but in the exercise of
analyzing, comparing, and combining these
various views of his situation, his mind was
imperceptibly drawn to the single subject
productive of them--his early attachment to
Adeline; and he fell into a comparatively calm
reverie--that species of calm, which dwelling
upon _one_ feeling generally produces, after the
mind has been tossed about in various contending
conflicts. His youthful and first affections,
together with all the awakening recollections
of early tenderness--the development of their
mutual passion, ere yet they knew they were
destined for each other--the happy prospect
of bliss which had succeeded--all, all recurred
to him, and revived the dying glow of attachment
in his breast. He took out her picture
from his writing-desk--gazed at the well-known
features, yet thought he had never
before been aware of their full and perfect
charm, that union of intelligence with purity
which is supposed to constitute the being
of an angel, that perfect candour, mingled
with quick perception, which this portrait
conveyed, and conveyed but feebly in comparison
with the original,--set the seal to his
conviction, that no one could prove to him
what Adeline had been.

In replacing the portrait, he lifted up some
loose papers, and it chanced that the lock of
Lady Hamlet Vernon's hair, which he had
kept (and never since looked at) on the night
when she had been overturned at his door,
dropped from the paper. He could not but
admire it; its glossy richness--its hue of gold
shining through the depth of its darkness:
it was certainly very beautiful, and he sighed
as he laid it down. "What if, indeed, her
words should be true, and how can they be
_true_ unless in one sense--in that of Adeline's
loving another? It must, it must be so!" and
this fatal conviction broke down once more
all the fabric of happiness which a moment
before he had erected: and in this revived
frenzy of feeling he passed the night. It was
broad daylight ere he could bring himself to
seek repose, nor did he then till worn-out
nature sunk in forgetfulness and sleep.

When he awoke the next day--for morning
was far advanced--it was like one awaking
from the delirium of fever. He felt exhausted,
spent, as though a long illness had shaken
his being--so much will a few hours of mental
agitation unnerve the strongest frame.
The more he tried to collect his thoughts and
bring them to a final result, the less did he
find himself capable of the effort; the energies
of his mind seemed paralyzed; he appeared
to himself to be under the influence of
some spell which impelled all his actions in an
opposite direction to his wishes, as in paralytic
affections, the limb ever moves in a contrary
motion to that which the sufferer would
have it. He was perplexed, amazed, and saw
no clue to guide him through the labyrinth.
The object of all his wishes--she to whom all
his views and plans had had reference from
the moment he could feel at all--now appeared
to have been almost within reach of his attainment,
and yet, by some inimical power,
was placed at a greater and more uncertain
distance than she had ever been. Lord Albert
was not a weak character: but who is not
weak, while they admit passion, and not principle,
to guide their conduct.

At length, after having run over the subjects
of his last night's perturbed reflections,
the decision to which he came was one, that
feeling alone, unaided by moral and religious
principle, was likely to conduct him to; and
he determined to pursue a middle course,
without making known his suspicions. He
resolved to miss no opportunity of observation,
till he should either have his fears dispelled
or confirmed concerning Mr. Foley. He
argued, that to speak openly to Lady Adeline,
would _not_ be to know the truth. Perhaps
she would not break from her engagement,
from a motive of delicacy as a woman, however
much she might wish to do so; and it
was left for him to free her from a chain
which was no longer voluntarily worn.

The more he reflected the more he thought
the intricacy of the case required this delicacy
on his part. She may not, he thought,
be herself aware of the nature of the attachment
she feels for me; compliance with her
parent's wishes, habit, duty, the kindly affection
of a sister's love, may be all that she
has felt towards myself; and now, for the
first time, she may experience the overpowering
nature of love. This must be what Lady
Hamlet Vernon alluded to; and if it is really
so, I should mar her happiness as well as my
own, by leading her to fulfil such a joyless
engagement. Oh, if indeed Lady Hamlet Vernon
has saved me from the wretchedness
which a marriage, under these circumstances,
with Adeline, must have produced, what
do I not owe her--gratitude--friendship--He
hesitated even in thought--he hesitated
to pronounce the word love; but a glow of
feverish rapture passed through his heart as
he recalled Lady Hamlet Vernon's beauty, her
fascination, her evident partiality for himself.
Yes, I must sift this matter to the utmost; I
must have irrefragable proofs of Adeline's
unshaken truth; nay more, of my being the
decided and sole chosen object of her truest
affections: and in the interim I will see her
frequently--see her in the world as well as in
retirement--and not allow myself to be blinded
by the specious veil which hitherto habit,
perhaps, has rendered equally deceptive to
both.

Could Lord Albert have known this to be
the self-same decision that Lady Adeline and
Lady Dunmelraise had come to in regard to
himself, it would have gone far to have settled
his determination at once, and to have
hastened a declaration which must have
confirmed his union with Lady Adeline. The
fatal security however of thinking that, under
all circumstances, Lady Adeline would keep
her engagement with him, whatever he might
ultimately decide upon, made him the more
apprehensive of owing her possession to any
motive save that of pure attachment; and
it may be also (for the heart is deceitful above
all things) that, resting on this very security,
he had allowed his feelings to betray him imperceptibly
into an aberration from their
natural channel, till at length he could not
distinguish truth from falsehood, and would
too certainly deplore his error when the remedy
was past his power.

Under the false but specious reasoning, then,
in which he now indulged, he strengthened
himself in his determination to pursue the plan
he had laid down, namely, of watching the
feelings and conduct of Lady Adeline in silence,
and of endeavouring to elicit from
Lady Hamlet Vernon, in whose friendship
and interest he placed a fatal but implicit
confidence, some of the grounds upon which
her mysterious words rested. With this decision
he prepared to go to South Audley
Street.




CHAPTER VII.

TRUE NOBILITY.


It must not be supposed that Lady Hamlet
Vernon admitted to herself that she was the
mover of _premeditated_ evil. Impelled by violent
impulse, it is true she hesitated not in
adopting means of any kind to attain her
wishes; for she invariably succeeded in reasoning
herself, however falsely, into a belief
that she had at least some apology to gloss
over, if not to justify, the measures she pursued.

Whatever calm she had assumed in her
late interview with Lord D'Esterre, she suffered
in secret the most painful agitation: the
violence she had done her feelings, in concealing
the disappointment she endured on
Lord Albert D'Esterre's leaving Restormel,
and the restraint that those feelings had since
undergone before she found a favourable opportunity
of speaking to him, all contributed
(when at length that opportunity at Lady
Tilney's supper-party did present itself) to
render their indulgence more overwhelming.
When she returned home that night, the
sleepless hours of suffering she passed were
not less painful in degree than those in which
Lord D'Esterre shared; with this difference
only in their nature, that the anguish endured
by him was of a varied and mixed kind;
whereas the whole mass of Lady Hamlet's
wishes were centred in an uncontrolled
passion for him; a passion which, since
she had allowed it to wear its undisguised
character, she found a thousand plausible
reasons for admitting to control her every
thought.

There was no cause, she argued, sufficiently
strong in Lord D'Esterre's engagement
with Lady Adeline to forbid the indulgence
of her love for him; _she_ had no relative
duties to sway her conduct--she was her
own mistress: and in the opinion of the
world--_her_ world at least--she would be
justified, where envy did not bias the
judgment, in endeavouring to form so desirable
a connexion. However Lord Albert
D'Esterre might have been ostensibly considered
by the members of the exclusive
circle as one of themselves, and however
much they affected to deride and despise his
principles and habits, yet as a man whose
talents promised to shine in the senate, and
whose interest was considerable, his actions
were not, in fact, quite so undervalued, or so
indifferent to the leading personages of that
body, as they might on a cursory view appear
to be. He was still, Lady Tilney thought,
too young, in her political way of viewing
every thing, and had not given sufficient
proofs of firmness, as a party man, for any
direct overtures to be made to him on that
score. But in as far as regarded his admission,
in the first instance, to society amongst
her coterie, he owed that distinction to his
youth, his personal appearance, and his high
rank; to his youth especially, as fitting him
to become, under clever tuition, an obedient
satellite; and when his very attractive exterior
and manners, which were at once dignified
and original, were added to the account, it
is not to be wondered that he was reckoned
a person worth courting, and a character
worth forming, which might be incorporated,
in due time, as one of their own.

Still there was a probationary state to pass
through before any one was actually admitted
into the arena of that circle. Lady Hamlet
Vernon, however, who from his first appearance
had marked him with her peculiar approbation,
was very clear-sighted as to the
views which might be formed of others respecting
an appropriation of him to their own
purposes; and she thought she perceived,
almost from the first, in the politic and eager
attentions of Lady Tilney towards him, as
well as in those of her silent but not uninterested
lord, some ulterior object in obtaining
his favour and confidence, which she
imagined might also turn to her own account,
as affording herself means to acquire an influence
over him of another nature.

It is surprising with what quick perception
women will discover the most hidden sentiments
of others, when they have the remotest
reference to the object of their favour and
predilection; and many a man owes his success
in life to the unceasing, and perhaps unknown
endeavours to serve him, of some devoted,
and it may be, unrequited heart. Who
will watch like a woman over those minute
details, which swell the aggregate of greater
means? Who can feel, as a woman can,
those vibrations of circumstances which may
enable her to seize upon favourable moments,
those _mollissima tempora fandi_, when the
current of success may be directed to the
object of her wishes. Lady Hamlet was well
skilled to do all this, and from the first of
Lord Albert's appearance in the circle in
which she moved, her most diligent attention
was ever awake to all that concerned him.
She perceived that whenever he was spoken
of, the Tilneys were particularly cautious
and guarded in giving their opinion; and
she was not mistaken in thence arguing
that they were aware he might become a
man of high consequence, in every sense of
the term, as well as in their own peculiar
acceptation of it.

Lady Hamlet Vernon felt that in this they
had not formed an erroneous view of him,
for she read ambition in his character: and
though the species of that quality of mind
was certainly very different in Lord Albert
and in herself, yet its general nature was no
stranger to her, and she knew it to be too
powerful a lever in human actions to overlook
or disregard it in this instance. On the
contrary, she determined to use it in behalf of
her own views; and from this motive she dwelt
with energy on the subject of Lord Albert's
prospects for the future, while conversing
with him at Lady Tilney's. She then
found she was touching a master-key to open
the secret recesses of his mind and feelings.
In its very first application, she had found it
more than answer her expectations; and the
consciousness that the apparent harmony of
her sentiments with his on this point, had
established an interest in and obtained an
influence over the very main-spring of Lord
Albert D'Esterre's being, inspired her with
the liveliest hope.

No mercenary views, it is true, no mean
love of power for little ends, actuated her,
but a violent and overpowering passion,
which, however, was equally subversive of
rectitude of conduct, since it was neither
guided by principle, nor restrained by moral
or religious control. It was not directly any
selfishness of motive that impelled her to
the course she was pursuing, for she would
have gone blindly forward in any plan the
most contrary to her interests, her habits, or
her feelings, which promised to draw her into
a union of sentiment with the object of her
passion; but those who suffer themselves to
be directed by such impulses, are under complete
delusion respecting the estimate they
form of themselves. Whenever passion obtains
the mastery, the effect is equally certain;
the wholesome freedom of a mind at liberty
is gone; and when once enslaved, it becomes
like a wave of the sea, tossed about in every
direction the sport of winds, and is as liable
to dash into ruin, as to use any power it may
possess to beneficial purposes.

Whilst the fever of agitation swayed Lady
Hamlet Vernon, she gave herself up in
secret to the inebriating delight of dwelling
upon Lord Albert's looks and words, during
their last interview; she recalled the expression
of his eyes, as he gazed at her while she
was speaking; she still seemed to feel the
pressure of his hand thrill through her veins,
as when he received the ring she gave him
in pledge of friendship; but as these intoxicating
sensations subsided, she relapsed again
into fear, lest she should have gone too far at
first; lest any thing she had said or looked
might have appeared too violent, too plainly
have told the tale of her feelings, ere time
had ripened the moment when their disclosure
might be more in unison with his
wishes. Then again she hoped that her agitation
might have been attributed alone to the
caution which she had ventured to give him
respecting Lady Adeline; and that she gave
him such caution, she trusted would have been
ascribed to a friendly feeling for his happiness.
"Yes, his happiness!" she repeated
to herself; "for I could sacrifice my own to
secure that boon for him. It is not from
motives of jealousy that I did so warn him,
for I could bear to see him the husband of
another, providing that other were really
worthy of him, one who would share in his
views, his plans, his feelings; but to unite
himself with a woman wholly unfit for him--a
girl, a weak insipid girl, made up of puritanical
observances and prejudices--no, I could
not see him set the seal to his future misery
by allowing him to remain in ignorance of
a fact which is known to all the world except
himself."

In this sophistical manner did Lady
Hamlet Vernon argue herself into the belief
that no selfish motive impelled her, but
that she was acting a noble part, and as
the end designed was good, the means she
thought were so likewise. In flattering
this belief, she recalled every look and
gesture of Lord Albert D'Esterre, and she
thought she had perceived that he entertained
a feeling of jealousy towards Mr.
Foley. "Perhaps," she said, musing on that
point, to which she had not before given her
full attention, "perhaps his jealousy is not
without foundation. Why is Mr. Foley so
much at Dunmelraise? The circumstance
of Lady Dunmelraise's protection of him
through life, is not sufficient cause. After
all, why should he not marry Lady
Adeline, if she likes him? It would be a
union much more consonant with Mr. Foley's
happiness (inasmuch as he would not care
what were her ways of thinking) than it
would be for the noble-minded, aspiring
D'Esterre."

In this new point of view Lady Hamlet
Vernon found another specious argument in
favour of her own conduct, and her secret
wishes; and if indeed this latter assumption
of a fact were true, she would be doing a
doubly generous action, in forwarding the
wishes of her friend Mr. Foley, while she at
the same time saved Lord D'Esterre from
a step that would inevitably render him
unhappy.

Such were the false reasonings with which
Lady Hamlet Vernon justified her feelings
and her conduct to herself, and under their
sway, she awaited with the utmost anxiety
and impatience for Lord D'Esterre on the
following morning. But it was late before he
came, and he was abstracted and silent when
he did arrive; unlike the animated being
whom she had witnessed speaking to her
with such force and expression of lively
feeling on the previous evening. The fact
is, Lord Albert D'Esterre had been at Lady
Dunmelraise's, where he had found Adeline
alone; and as, in her converse and presence,
there was a soothing calm, a persuasive assurance,
even in her silence, of her perfect
purity and truth, those feelings of jealous
doubt and mistrust that had preyed upon
him before his visit to her, had gradually
subsided while under the influence of her
immediate power. Above all, the interest
she expressed for him, the alarm she declared
she felt on beholding his haggard
look, and suddenly changed appearance,
awoke in his breast all those tender feelings
which it was a second nature for him
to cherish towards her.

He felt indeed that he could have laid his
head on her breast, confessed his folly, and
wept out his fault in having for a moment
suspected her; "but then again," he thought,
"it will be time enough thus to humble
myself when I see proof that my suspicions
are indeed groundless; and I shall not be
acting up to my resolution, if I allow a moment
of tenderness to put it out of my
power to certify the truth of her's."

Mr. Foley's name was not once mentioned
during his visit. Mr. Foley did not appear;
and for the time Lord Albert D'Esterre felt
happy. "We shall see," he said to himself,
"if this fair shew is real; a short time will
serve to prove its truth, and then my happiness
will stand on a secure basis."

He took leave, therefore, of Lady Adeline
with a mind much relieved, and having
impressed her also with the sensation that
he felt towards her, all he had ever felt; but
no sooner did he quit her presence, than,
with that waywardness of spirit, which is too
often apt to embitter our best interests, he
was impelled to call on Lady Hamlet Vernon,
for the sole purpose, as he fancied, of
gathering indirectly from her conversation a
more clear insight into the subject of her
discourse. But in her presence, he in vain
endeavoured to lead her to it; she avoided
all reference, however remote, to the cause
of his inquietude, and when she touched on
the topic of his public career in life, Lord
Albert felt that it was done in so vague
and wary a manner, as to afford him no clue
whatever to what engrossed at that moment
all his thoughts, and he involuntarily became
silent, and manifested an indifference to
all farther converse. When he arose to take
his leave, if he was less happy than when he
had left Lady Adeline, he was not conscious
of any reason why it should be so; but that
of which he could not fail to be conscious, was
the sensation that a spell was spread around
him, whenever he approached Lady Hamlet
Vernon.

To her inquiries if he would join her circle
in the evening, and if he were one of those
invited to the water-party the following day,
he answered with apparent indifference; and,
with a doubtful half-formed promise to attend
her in the evening, he left the house.
He was bewildered and uneasy; dissatisfied
with himself, and consequently with all the
world; and Lady Hamlet Vernon was miserable
on her part at witnessing his change
of manner, and remarking the serious and
preoccupied expression of his countenance,
which seemed totally at variance with her
wishes.

That evening Lord Albert dedicated to a
few hours of quiet in his own apartments;
but the habit, of any kind, which has once
been broken through, is not so easily resumed;
and in particular the power of sober
application to serious pursuits is hardly by
any man to be laid by and recovered at will.
The mind which is suffered to float about,
driven by the winds of chance, becomes unfitted
for fixed attention to any one particular
point; and the effort is painful which must
be made before it can be brought to bear on
reflective subjects, after having been suffered
to follow the vague direction of the feelings,
or the yet more debilitating influence of dissipation.

Lord Albert acknowledged this, as he had
recourse to various books for amusement.
His attention wandered; and now he was at
Lady Dunmelraise's, now at Lady Hamlet
Vernon's--but never was he on the subject
of the leaves which he vainly turned over;
and after an evening spent in vacuity, he felt
as fatigued, and more dispirited than had he
been deeply engaged in some mental effort.
The consciousness of this lowered state of
being was exceedingly uneasy to him. He
was one who, for so young a man, had
learnt thoroughly to know the value of time,
and when it was thus utterly lost or misapplied,
he could not forgive himself for the
irreparable fault.

Lord Albert, too, had an impression fixed
indelibly on his mind, that when we are not
advancing we are retrograding in our mental
or moral course of existence; and fortunately
for him, he was yet keenly sensible to the
reproaches of conscience. His determination
at the moment, therefore, to redeem this
heavy loss was salutary and sincere; and he
felt a renovation in his whole being when he
took his early walk next day to Lady Dunmelraise's,
full of the good resolutions he
had formed the preceding day. To be in the
presence of Lady Adeline Seymour, was like
being in the sunshine of spring. There was
an habitual serenity about her, which seemed
to animate all around her; every thing and
every sentiment of Adeline's was in its right
place--no one took undue precedence of the
other; the harmony of her form and features
was a true reflection of her happily disposed
nature; but that nature owed its very essence
and continuance to the great ruling
feeling of her mind. Every thought, and every
action, were immediately or remotely under
the guidance of pious belief: the nature of
her happiness could not be uprooted by any
earthly power; she might suffer _anguish
here_; but she had a secret and secure joy
that those only know who, like her, fix the
anchor of their trust on an hereafter.

Having spent the greater part of the morning
in such society, Lord Albert tacitly acknowledged
its superiority to that in which
he had lately lived, and the invitation he
received to dine in South Audley Street was
eagerly accepted. The party which he found
assembled at Lady Dunmelraise's consisted
chiefly of her family,--Lord and Lady Delamere,
their two sons and daughter, and a
few other persons who came in the evening.
Lord Delamere was a shy man, and his shyness
had sometimes the effect of pride; but
the estimable points in his character were of
such sterling value, that his friends loved him
with a zeal of attachment which spoke volumes
in his praise; and he was looked up to
by his family, not only as their father, but
their companion: nothing could be more
beautiful than the union which subsisted between
them; nothing more truly worthy of
imitation than the virtuous dignity with which
they filled their high station.

Lady Delamere still possessed great beauty;
and the charm that never dies, the charm
of fascination of manner and of air, defied
the inroads which time makes on mere personal
beauty. She was one of those very
few women, who unite to feminine gentleness
the qualities ascribed to a masculine mind.
At the time she married, her husband's affairs
were so much involved, that nothing but the
utmost self-denial could possibly retrieve
them: and she entered into his plans of retrenchment
with an alacrity and vigour,
which proved her to be a wife indeed; not
the play-thing of an hour, to deck the board,
or gratify the vanity of the possessor, but a
companion, a friend, a helpmate, one who
in retirement possessed resources that could
enliven and cheer the solitary hour: who
knew she was loved, and felt she deserved to
be so, with that security of honest pride,
which the consciousness of desert never fails
to impart in married life, and yet whose
refinement and delicacy of feeling never lost
the elegancies of polished manners, because
there were no novel objects to excite a sickly
appetite for admiration.

To please is certainly the peculiar attribute
and business of woman, in every relation
of life; and those who neglect to foster
and keep alive this power, reject one of the
greatest means which Providence has placed
in their hands to effect mighty operations of
good. But there is a false and spurious kind
of pleasing which must not be confounded
with the true. Every woman will know
how to distinguish these in her own conscience.
When the wish to please is a
mere gratification of vanity, when it lives
always beyond the circle of her own hearth,
and dies as soon as it is called upon for
exercise within domestic walls; then, indeed,
it may be known for what it is: but
when, as in Lady Delamere's case, this virtue
shone most splendidly confined to the sphere
of home, its price was above rubies; in
short it might truly be said of her, "the
heart of her husband doth safely trust in
her."

At the time when Lord Delamere was
in the greatest difficulties, he did not, as
too many do, fly to a foreign country, to continue
the life of self-indulgence which he
could no longer maintain in his own; he
did not make it an excuse for forsaking his
patrimony, and the seat of his ancestors,
that he could not live there in that splendour
which he had formerly done; but with a
spirit of true pride he said: "the land of
my forefathers with bread and water, rather
than banishment and luxuries." He
made no secret of his poverty; and it was a
means of clothing him with honour: for
with patience in his solitude he found content,
and with content all things. His self-denial
enabled him to be generous to others:
and the very act of living on his estates, gave
bread to hundreds. Lady Delamere went
hand in hand with him in all his plans; and
they pursued, for some years, with untiring
step, the path of duty which they had marked
out.

Meanwhile, their family grew up around
them, and every thing prospered--for a
blessing went along with them: they were
adored by their dependents; honoured even
by those who hated them for their superiority;
and with the occasional visit of a
relative or friend their time flowed on, fruitful
in its course, and fraught with real and
substantial happiness.

But in this their retirement they were not
forgotten. It is not those who are fluttering
about their empty shewy existence in the
sunshine of pleasure and splendour whose
memories live longest, even in that very
world they so busily court. All great and
useful works are the fruit of retirement; all
strength of character is formed, not in indulgence
and prosperity, but in retreat, and
under the grave hand of that schoolmaster
Adversity. The corn is not ripened till it receives
the first and the latter rain: neither is
the moral character formed to its great end,
till it has known the storms of adversity. The
Delameres had now reaped the fruits of this
earthly probation, and they shone forth with
lustre, which could not be eclipsed by any
tinsel splendour of mere outward grandeur.
The children of such parents could not be
supposed to be altogether different from
themselves, for though there are anomalies in
nature, it rarely happens that the offspring
are not like either father or mother, still
less that they are not ultimately influenced
by the example of parents.

When Lord Albert D'Esterre found himself
in this happy society, so different, and
yet, as he acknowledged to himself in every
passing moment, so superior to that in which
he had lately lived, he felt as if he also
were of another race of beings; a pleased
sort of self-satisfaction took possession of
him: so much are we affected by outward
things, so much does the mind reflect the
hues by which it is surrounded. Are these,
he thought, the persons whose names I have
been accustomed to hear coupled with ridicule
or condemnation--are these the persons
who are designated vulgar? Strange indeed
is the misnomer! And that there were
many in the same grade, whose characters
shed lustre upon their high stations, many
who constituted the true character of British
nobles, was a truth that Lord Albert had not
sufficiently considered; for where is there
a body in any country more worthy of respect
and admiration than the real nobility
of our land? It is only to be lamented that
the errors of the few, and the assumed superiority
of the _ton_, should have given ground
for a false estimate of those characters of
solid worth, whose virtues and whose ancient
ancestry reflect a mutual value on
each other; and the moral tranquillity of
whose lives is at once a dignified refutation
of the depreciation of high birth, and the
best confirmation of its real consequence.
But the middling classes, those who envy
their superiors, or those who would attain
to a distinction in society to which they have
no immediate claim, are too apt in these days
to form a mistaken judgment, founded upon
newspaper reports or the spurious publications
of the day, in which much false representation
is mingled with some gross truths,
and the delinquency of the few ascribed to the
conduct of the many. Nor is it these alone,
who are thus led into an erroneous opinion.
The public press produces a circulation of
good and evil, of truth or falsehood, universally;
and wherever the latter creeps in, there
ought to be an antidote administered. It
should not be suffered to smoulder and gain
force till it produce some serious mischief.

It should be told that the few individuals,
whose idle and trifling lives, and whose tenour
of conduct lay them open to contumely
and blame, do _not_ constitute the great mass
of English nobility. So far from it, they are
persons whose lives differ as much from the
general existence of their compeers, as does
the life of one individual in any class from
that of another. Vice is not confined to
nobility because a few great names have
sullied its brightness. It is a false conclusion
to consider _them_ as examples of their
caste, any more than the man in inferior
station, whose delinquency is proved, and
who suffers the penalty of the law, is to be
taken as a specimen of the people at large.

In the course of conversation at Lady
Dunmelraise's dinner, the ensuing drawing-room
was spoken of. "I am one of those
old-fashioned persons," said Lady Delamere,
"who feel a real pleasure in the thought of
going to court--for first, I shall have the
gratification of seeing my Sovereign, and of
presenting to him another branch of that
parent stock, who are personally as well as
on principle attached to him and to his
house. And though, doubtless, there are
many who share in these feelings, yet I will
yield the palm of loyalty and zeal to none;
and, in the second place, I do very firmly
believe that, in as far as society goes, a drawing-room
does much moral good. There
are certain lines drawn, which are useful to
remind persons in general, that vice is contemned,
and virtue honoured; and there is
a distinction, too, of time, and place, and situation,
which is not yet laid aside; I heartily
wish there were many more drawing-rooms
than there are."

Lord Delamere fully agreed with his
wife in this opinion--the young people did
not giggle and whisper, "what a bore it
will be," but coincided with their parents.
Lady Mary Delamere too declared, that she
thought there was no occasion better suited
to shew off real beauty to advantage than the
splendour of a mid-day assembly, where
every thing conspired to give people an air of
decorative style which they could not possess
at any other public meeting. "What pleasure,"
she continued, "I shall have in going
with my cousin Adeline, and gathering up all
the stray words of admiration, which I am sure
will abundantly fall in her praise. Do tell
me, love," addressing herself to her in a half
whisper, while the rest of the persons at
table conversed on other matters, "do tell
me of what colour is your dress, and how it
is to be trimmed?"

"Really," replied Lady Adeline, colouring
as though she had committed a crime, "I
have not thought about it. All I begged of
Mamma was, that it might be very simple,
and, I believe, of a rose-colour--for a rose is
my favourite flower."

"Dear child," said the good-natured
Lady Mary, "you must think about it now,
for the day is drawing near, and I shall
be so disappointed if you are not well
dressed."

"You are very kind, sweet cousin, but if
you only knew how very little I care about
the matter;" and she laughed heartily at the
idea of its being a subject of the least importance.

"But, Lord Albert D'Esterre," said Lady
Mary, appealing to him as he sat on the
other side of Lady Adeline, "you will
interfere, will you not? You will not be
pleased, I am sure, lovely as Adeline is, to see
her a _figure_ at a drawing-room."

"What sort of figure do you mean?" he
asked, smiling.

"Oh dear! you know well enough what
I mean--unbecomingly attired."

"I think," he replied, "that although
some figures will always be admired, still
there is no merit in disdaining the usages of
society or the advantages of dress, and that
the neglect of appearance may in a young
person be produced by some causes which
are not desirable." He looked fixedly at
Adeline as he spoke, and she blushed very
deeply; but answered with an unhesitating
voice:

"I shall be always desirous of pleasing
those I love, even in trifles; but I should be
sorry that trifles occupied their thoughts."

Lord Albert was silent; he felt a kind of
chill come over him, for the remembrance
of Lady Hamlet Vernon's instructions recurred
to him; and he thought he saw a
species of puritanical pride in the general
tenour of Lady Adeline's manner of thinking
and speaking, which seemed to justify the observations
she had made upon her character.
Then again he feared, that in other points
he might discover more reason still to be
dissatisfied--points on which his vital happiness
rested. He looked instinctively round
the room; but the person who at that
moment crossed his thoughts was not present,
and he again wrapped himself up in
that mood of suspicion, which is ever on
the alert to seek out the object which
would give it most pain; under this influence
he returned to the subject of Adeline's
presentation dress, and said, addressing
Lady Dunmelraise:

"I am not particularly an advocate for
splendid attire; but I am sure, Lady Dunmelraise,
you will agree with me in thinking,
that there is an affectation in going unadorned
to a court, which is a sort of disrespect
to the place."

"Indeed," said Lady Adeline, in her wild
eager way, "I will not go to much expenditure
on my dress, for I have a plan for doing
some good going on, which will require all
the money I can collect, and I should be very
sorry to see mamma wasting her's on any
thing which I so little prize as my court-dress."

Lady Dunmelraise only smiled, and replied,
"We must all subscribe to Adeline's
toilette, for she is the veriest miser on that
score herself. However, Lord Albert, do not
be uneasy, I think she will not disgrace us,"
and the pleased mother passed on to other
discourse.

This tenacity of Lady Adeline appeared to
be a confirmation of his suspicions; and
when, in the after part of the evening, Mr.
Foley was announced, Lord Albert lost all
command over himself, and under plea of
a bad head-ache, sat silent, that he might
the better watch every look and motion of
Lady Adeline and Mr. Foley. Turning every
indifferent word and gesture into the meaning
with which his jealousy clothed it, he fancied
that they were certainly mutually attached.
Whatever soothing attentions Lady Adeline
shewed to himself, he imagined were put
on for the purpose of deceiving him; and
his manner was so cold and haughty, that
she in her turn began to shrink within herself,
and to wear an abstracted, and somewhat
distressed countenance.

Under this impression, Mr. Foley, with
his _doucereux_ air, whispered Lady Adeline,
"that he was sure she was ill," and asked
her "to cast out the evil spirit by her sweet
power of music."

"Do, my love," said Lady Dunmelraise,
"sing that delightful duet, which is always
charming, '_O Momento fortunato!_' and
then I feel sure we shall be all love and
harmony--shall we not, Lord D'Esterre?"

The chords of the piano-forte relieved
him from the embarrassment of a reply, and
he listened to the impassioned tones of _poi
Doman, poi Doman l'altro_, ascribing to every
intonation and every sentiment of her feeling
voice the dictates of a passion for his
supposed rival.

"That used to be a favourite of yours,
Albert," said Lady Adeline when the duet
was finished; "but I am afraid your head-ache
prevents you from enjoying any thing
to-night."

"I do not feel well," he replied shortly;
"and lest my indisposition should in any
way affect the pleasure of others, I will
hasten away."

"Oh yes, you appear ill, indeed!" said
Lady Adeline, fixing her eyes tenderly on
his; "and, dear Albert, perhaps you had
better go--the noise of company may be
too much for you:" and she held out her
hand to him--"Oh, if you are unwell, by
all means go home," she repeated, with an
anxiety of tender interest, that no one else
could misinterpret to be any thing but
genuine affection, but which to him seemed
to spring from the desire of his absence.

"You shall be obeyed," he said, returning
her look reproachfully; and at the same time
reaching his hat, which happened to lie on
a table beyond Mr. Foley, he almost rudely
snatched it away, and with a celerity of
movement that admitted of no courtesy to
any one present, departed. Lady Dunmelraise
called after him, "Lord Albert, do
you dine here to-morrow?" But he heard
not, or affected not to hear, and with the
gnawing rage of blind jealousy darted into his
carriage, and gave the order, "home."

Soon after the rest of the party broke up;
and when Lady Dunmelraise and her daughter
found themselves once more alone, their
mutual silence proved that they both felt the
strangeness of Lord Albert's manner of departure.
But although the words were on
Lady Dunmelraise's tongue to utter--"_he is
capricious_,"--she restrained, and suffered
them to die away in silence, determined that
her daughter's own unbiassed judgment
should form for herself that opinion of Lord
Albert's character, which would soon now
ultimately decide on her acceptance or rejection
of him as her husband.




CHAPTER VIII.

OFFICIAL LIFE.


It may be recollected, that when Lady
Glenmore returned from the water-party, she
was cruelly disappointed at finding only a
note from her husband. "How little," she
thought, as she sat at her toilette taking off
the dress which in the morning she had not
despised, as having been approved of and
admired by him, but which now she cast aside
with disdain--"how little men know how
to value the affections of a wife! I have been
for many hours in what is called a gay scene,
and during the whole of the time, I cannot
recal one moment when Glenmore was
not present to my fancy; but he, I dare say,
on the contrary, has not given a wish or a
sigh to me." She looked in the glass as she
thought this, and although a tear dimmed
her eye, vanity whispered, "ought this to
be so?"

"I am at least _pretty_; young, no one can
deny; yet I am neglected for a number of
old stupid men, a dull political discussion.
Oh, those vile politics! how I hate them.
And when he comes home, he will look so
grave, so preoccupied! Oh, I wish there was
no such thing in the world as a House of
Lords or Commons. Is life itself long enough
for love?--and must dull, dry business, consume
the hours of youth, pale his cheek,
perhaps blanch his hair, his beautiful hair,
for they say care has whitened the locks even
in one night! how very terrible this is."--And
she arose, and walked to and fro in her
room, and listened to every carriage that
rolled by--then she took up Lalla Rookh--read
some of the most impassioned passages,
and wished herself a Peri.

"I have but one wish," she said, "that
wish is to be loved as I love."--Poor Lady
Glenmore! this beautiful phantom of a young
heart is, nevertheless, in the sense in which
she framed it, a mere deceit. Love such as
her's does _not_ grow by feeding on; there is
a strength of character, a consciousness of
self-dignity, the duties of a rational being,
above all, the duties of a Christian, which
must be cherished and understood, before
any lasting fabric of happiness can be built
on love. This was never more proved than
in the restless impatience, the miserable (for
such hours to such minds are miserable)
anxiety and disappointment, which converted
minutes into hours, and hours into ages, before
Lord Glenmore returned. As she foresaw,
when he did come, though he pressed
her with almost rapturous tenderness to his
heart, and inquired with trusting fondness
at her party, hoping she had been well
amused, he was himself so exhausted and
harassed by business, that he professed himself
unable to talk. "Why did you sit up
for me, dearest?" he asked; "you will fatigue
yourself uselessly; and I must really insist
in future that you do not do so. At least,
if you had been _amusing yourself_, I should,
not be so sorry; but as it is, really Georgina,
love, you must be better behaved in future--but
why did you not go to the supper?"

"I came home to see you," she answered
in a tremulous voice. Lord Glenmore chided
her lovingly, and assured her that he had
not less anxiously desired to return to her;
but he said, smiling,

"You know you have the advantage over
our sex, for _your business_ is love--but our
_business_ is a matter apart from that gentler
care. I long to tell you, my sweet Georgina,
all that has interested me this day, and I
think you will share in my satisfaction; but
I am really unequal to enter into the details
at present: to-morrow, love, you shall know
all." Lady Glenmore only sighed; but with
the sweet docility of her nature, never questioned
his will, and his being with her constituted
in fact all she cared to know. The
truth was, that certain changes in the ministry
had long been talked of, and on that
morning overtures had been made to Lord
Glenmore to take on himself an important
office. The whole of the morning had been
occupied in settling preliminaries, and ascertaining
the sentiments of these public men
with whom he was to act: for Lord Glenmore
was a conscientious man, and would
not mount a ladder, which he intended
afterwards to cast down. It was not place
he sought, but power, for purposes alike
good and great. He felt within himself a
capacity for the honours and distinctions
he aspired to, and knew on principle the
responsibility which attends success in such
measures.

One of the first persons, whom he considered
to be a man of inflexible integrity,
and whom he wished for as a colleague
in office, was Lord Albert D'Esterre;
and since the situation which he
had himself received threw several appointments
into his own hands, Lord Glenmore
lost no time in writing him the following
note:

/#
"MY DEAR D'ESTERRE:--I think that I
shall not be making a proposal unacceptable
to your wishes, or in discrepancy with your
future plans, when I announce to you that
I have accepted the office of ----. The
official appointments immediately connected
with it of course become mine, and it would
afford me the greatest satisfaction in my
arduous undertaking, to have one possessed
of your talents to aid me in the performance
of its duties. Would you accept the
office of under Secretary of State in my
department? I need not express my ardent
hope that you will consent. You know that
our views of public matters coincide thoroughly--let
me therefore hear from or see
you as soon as possible.

/*[5]
"Your's ever most truly,

"GLENMORE."
*/
#/

After despatching this note, Lord Glenmore
sought his wife, and entered into
an account of what passed the previous
day; he spoke of the increased expediency
that would ensue of her living very much
in society, whether he could himself be
present with her or not; and added, that she
must not allow any fears or mistrust, either
of herself or him, to lessen the pleasure
which it was natural, at her age and with her
charm of person, she should derive from the
homage around her.

"It is not mistrust, dearest Glenmore,
that makes me feel joyless in your absence,
for what can I fear?--it is true that I am
uninterested in every thing, when you are
not by to share my pleasure; but indeed
you quite mistake me, love, if you suppose
that I am not all confidence in you. And as to
myself, what is there that can be for a moment
dangerous to my peace, when all my
interest, all my wishes, are centred in your
love?"

"My own best Georgina," he replied,
pressing her to his breast, "be ever thus, and
what can I wish for more. But, love, mark
me--you are now no longer the girl, whose
duties were centred in passive obedience to
her relatives, and whose recreations were the
innocent, but trifling pursuits of girlhood;
you are the wife of a man who is become a
servant of the public--whose high cares must
necessarily debar him frequently from the
enjoyment of those domestic pleasures which
a less busy or responsible life might allow.
It is now become your duty, love, to feel your
own consequence in his--to play _your_ part in
the scale by which his actions must be measured,
and to be aware that many will court
you from an idea of your being wife to a
minister, who  would not for your own sake
alone, perhaps, have thought of you; while
others who previously courted you for the
charm of your presence and the beauty of
your outward shew, will now doubly affect your
society, and endeavour, it may be, to use your
influence to undue purposes. All are not pure
and single-hearted like you, my dearest, and
these cautions, believe me, are not given
as to one whose worth I doubt, but, on the
contrary, to one whose very ingenuousness
and worth may prove a snare to her. In all
that concerns mere knowledge of the world
I recommend you to look to Lady Tenderden
and Lady Tilney; they have passed creditably
through the busy throng, and are certainly
in all respects fashionable, and bear
a high consideration in the estimation of
the London world. You cannot do better,
then, than to shape your course by their's
in respect to what the French call _conduite_;
and to the dictates of the heart, and moral duties,
I refer you to your own and your excellent
mother's."

Lady Glenmore scarcely knew why, but
her heart swelled almost to bursting while
her husband spoke thus to her; and it was
with difficulty that she restrained the tears
which seemed at every moment ready to
overflow. The truth was she dwelt upon
his first words, his declaration that his newly
acquired honour would debar him from the
pleasures of home society; and she looked up
timidly as with tender accents she asked,
"whether she was doomed now to be always
absent from him."

"I trust not, dearest; at all events, you
know my best and fondest interests are centred
in you, and you would, I am sure, consider
your husband's advantage and glory to
be of value to you, even though these were
obtained by the sacrifice of his company."

She said "yes," but _felt_ decidedly, that had
she spoken the truth, the "yes" would have
been "no."

Lord Glenmore received several notes,
and with a preoccupied air which prevented
his observing the melancholy depicted
on his wife's countenance, he snatched a
hasty embrace, and was hurrying away,
when looking back he said, "Remember
love, not a word of this to any one, even
to your mother. A few days will release
the restraint I put upon your tongue," he
added, smiling; "but in you I expect to
find the _wonder_, that a woman can keep
a secret;--in all things, I believe in, and
trust you. Adieu, love, adieu." And he was
gone.

That which would have pleased a vain
woman, and gratified an ambitious one, fell
only like lead on the young Georgina's
heart.

"So," she said, sinking down in a chair, "I
am a minister's wife. And am I the happier?
Far, far from it; I am seldom now to see my
husband, and when I do, the concerns of the
public are to form our consideration and
discourse; whereas, hitherto, in the short
sunshine of our marriage, ourselves, our
mutual hopes, our own dear home, have
constituted all our care; and I fondly
trusted, perhaps foolishly hoped, would have
continued to do so. What a desolating
change! But he says I must prepare
for it; and since it is his will that thus
it should be, I will endeavour to hide the
mournful feelings of my heart. My dear
mamma shall not see that I have wept either,
for she will, perhaps, ascribe my tears to my
husband's temper, and that would be worse
still." So saying, she roused herself from the
despondency into which she had fallen, bathed
her face, called up smiles which were _not
genuine_ for the first time in her life; and,
having re-arranged her dress, she said to
herself as she cast a glance at her mirror,
"Am I not now metamorphosed into the
wife of a minister?" Just as she was preparing
to ring her bell for her carriage,
Lady Tenderden arrived.

"How well you are looking, _la belle aux
yeux bleus_," said Lady Tenderden, kissing
her: "there certainly never was any body
who had the azure of the skies so exactly reflected
in her eyes." This might be true;
but it certainly was not true that she was
looking well. To a vague answer given by
Lady Glenmore she made no allusion; but
looking at her very fixedly, so fixedly that
it made her colour deeply, Lady Tenderden
said, "Yet methinks something more than
usual has occurred--is the report true?"

"What report?"

"Nay, now, do not make the _discreet_, for
by to-morrow it will be in the newspapers.
Come, tell me, your friend, am I not to wish
you joy?"

"Of what, I may ask you in return,
Lady Tenderden, for I can sincerely answer,
that no increased cause of joy has befallen
me, that I know of." This was said so
very naturally, that her interrogator was
posed. Judging by herself, Lady Tenderden
conceived it impossible that the report
of Lord Glenmore's having accepted a high
office in government, which would have
been the envy of so many, should be true;
or else she thought the little lady must be
more silly than she ever believed her to
be. She went on, nevertheless, to sound
Lady Glenmore in various ways, expecting
to make out something relative to the subject;
but Lady Glenmore's calm indifference
totally foiled her, as she herself afterwards
confessed; and she set it down in her own
mind that for the present she could not
be of any particular service to her, or derive
any more reflected lustre from her, as being
the friend of a woman whose husband was
in power.

How the simplicity of a genuine character
confounds the pertinacity of a keen worldly
mind! Lady Tenderden was completely at
fault: when another visitor, who came much
on the same errand, afforded an additional
proof of the truth of this observation. Lady
Tilney came up to Lady Glenmore, and after
the first salutation, entered with all her
energy and eloquence upon politics; inveighing
against government measures, and
hoping that now a man of more liberal
principles had come in, some change of
_measures_ at least would be adopted. Lady
Glenmore sat abstracted, and began arranging
her embroidery frame; seeing that there
was no chance of Lady Tilney's speech coming
to a conclusion:

"Well, my dear, and now," the latter said,
"you will really have a part to play: how I envy
you! What interest--what endless business
will devolve on you! Were I you, I would
propose to Lord Glenmore to write all his
private letters for him; by this means you
know you would be _au fait_ of all the state
secrets, and could, in a great measure,
guide things your own way. You write rapidly,
I believe; and your hand is not bad;
it wants a little more character perhaps: but
you know there is the man who advertises to
teach any hand-writing. I do assure you he
is excellent--I tried him myself, and a very
few lessons from him would teach you to give
your writing the firm diplomatic air--and
you would quickly learn that significant
style which means nothing; and by which,
should any thing occur to make you change
your mind (Lord Glenmore's, I mean), you
could twist the phrase into another meaning,
suitable to the occasion. I am sure I am
always for decision and truth; but in certain
cases prudence and caution are necessary;
and therefore these resources are requisite to
be observed in diplomatic writing. If you look
back, you will always see it has been so in
all ministers' letters."

Lady Glenmore, who had sat silent hitherto,
now conceived herself obliged to
speak, and replied, "that she knew nothing
of diplomacy, except the name; that every
thing of the kind always made her yawn, and
she hoped she should never have to copy any
letters of business for any body." Lady Tilney
in her turn stared, and observing that
Lady Glenmore was very young, she said:
"Well, but at all events you will be delighted
to see your name perpetually with
all the people in power; and to hear them
say, that is the minister's beautiful wife! and
the honours of your husband, at least to any
one so domestically inclined, must be a great
delight."

"I do not want Lord Glenmore to have
any more honours than he has, for my own
sake; but whatever pleases him will certainly
please me."

"Oh, oh! so then you do confess it? and
he _is_ minister for ----"

"I am happy to hear it, if it really is to
confer all the honour you seem to think upon
him. But I wish you would tell me what _you_
mean, Lady Tilney, for I do not quite understand
you." There was a sort of real _not
caring_ about Lady Glenmore, which deceived
Lady Tilney, as it had done Lady Tenderden.
It was a thing so totally out of Lady Tilney's
calculation that any one should not be
enchanted at such a situation, that she was
persuaded either that the fact was not so, or
that Lady Glenmore did not know that it was
the case.

Just as this inquisition had ceased, a servant
entered with a few lines written in pencil
on a card, which he gave to Lady Tenderden:
they were from Mr. Leslie Winyard, to say,
that having seen her carriage at the door,
and having something very particular to
communicate to her, he requested ten minutes'
conversation, if he might be allowed
to come up. Lady Tenderden remembered
Lady Glenmore's former scruples about receiving
him, but determined to overcome
them.

"_Chère ladi_," she said, "you must positively,
notwithstanding the fear of Lord
Glenmore, allow me to see Mr. Leslie Winyard;
I will take all the _imminent_ risk of the
danger upon myself; and besides, you know,
visiting _me_ is not visiting _you_." Lady Glenmore
looked exceedingly distressed, and
said, "If you want to speak to Mr. Leslie
Winyard, why can you not speak to him in
your carriage?"

"Oh! that is so uncomfortable. Besides,
Lady Tilney, I appeal to you, was there ever
any thing so strange as Lady Glenmore's
refusing to let Mr. Leslie Winyard come up
stairs to see me, merely because _le tiran de
mari_ does not approve of morning visits
from gentlemen?"

"Pho, pho," said Lady Tilney, "he was
only joking, and that dear little good Georgina
thought he was serious." Then turning
to the servant who was waiting for orders,
"Shew Mr. Leslie Winyard up stairs directly,"
commanding, as she always did, or
tried to do, in every place and every person.
In a few minutes Mr. Leslie Winyard made
his appearance; and having paid his compliments
to Lady Glenmore and Lady Tilney
for some little time, he then stepped aside
with Lady Tenderden, and after conversing
together, apparently engaged on a most interesting
subject, they returned to the other
ladies, and he entered into general conversation
with his usual light and amusing
anecdote. At length, however, Lady Tilney
arose, saying to Mr. Winyard, "well, notwithstanding
your _agrémens_, I must go, for
I have a hundred things to do." Lady Tenderden
echoed this declaration, and they both
went away, leaving Mr. Leslie Winyard, who
seemed determined to sit them out _en tête-à-tête_
with Lady Glenmore.

The consciousness that any thing has been
said on any subject, always creates in an unartificial
mind an awkwardness when the predicament
that has led to the discussion really
occurs;--and Lady Glenmore experienced this
painfully. Every instant the sensation became
stronger, and, of course, was not lost to
the observation of her companion, though he
affected not to perceive it; and by dint of
feigning ignorance, and talking on indifferent
subjects, he arrived at bringing her into
the calm and comfortable frame of mind
he had in view, one in which she would
feel _le diable n'est pas si noir_; and this
he effected with his usual address, till he
evidently saw that she was rather diverted
than otherwise by his conversation.

He then led the discourse to music, and
entreated her once more to sing the _Sempre
più t'amo_ of Caraffa. She readily agreed, and
their voices were in beautiful and thrilling
unison when the door opened, and in came
Lord Glenmore. His wife suddenly stopped,
and rising from the instrument, looked abashed.
Lord Glenmore, with the manners of a man
of the world, addressed Mr. Leslie Winyard,
regretted that he had interrupted the music,
declared that he had some letters to write,
and prayed him to finish the duet. But Lady
Glenmore tried in vain to recommence singing--her
voice faltered, her hand trembled,
as she touched the keys--her eyes wandered to
her husband with an expression of inquiry
and uneasiness; and Mr. Leslie, too much the
man of the world, and too much skilled in
his _métier_ to push matters at an unfavourable
moment, declared that he was exceedingly
sorry, but found himself under the
necessity of going away, having an appointment
on business which he could not put
off. Apologizing, therefore, to Lord Glenmore,
to whom he always took care to pay
particular deference, for not being able to
remain, he hurried out.

Lady Glenmore hastened with considerable
trepidation of manner to explain to her
husband how it had chanced that he found
her singing with Mr. Leslie Winyard; but
Lord Glenmore seemed more deeply engaged
in thinking of the letter he was perusing
than of what she was saying, and only looked
up smilingly in her face, and said, "My dear
love, why are you so agitated about such a
trifle?"--"Is it a trifle?" she said: "well,
then, I need not care, and am quite happy
again." She kissed his forehead; and further
discourse was prevented by a servant's entering,
to inform Lord Glenmore that Lord
D'Esterre requested to see him if he was
disengaged. Lord Glenmore immediately
desired that he might be shewn into his private
apartment; and at the same time gave
orders that no one else might be admitted
except the persons whose names were on the
list; then pressing his wife's hand tenderly,
but evidently much preoccupied in mind, he
left the room.

"Is it possible," thought Lady Glenmore,
looking after him--"can this be _my_ husband,
who so lately appeared to have no thought
save what we mutually shared? and now we
seem suddenly cast asunder: different interests,
different hours, different societies, all
seems to place us, as if by magic, apart, and
to divide us from each other. He too, who
dwelt so particularly on my not receiving
morning visits from young men, now seems
to think it is become a matter of indifference,
or rather not to think about it at all. Has
power then changed him so quickly? What
a horrible thing power is!--how it transforms
every thing into its own heartless self!
Surely, surely, it is the most miserable thing
in the world to be a minister's wife!" To
dissipate the melancholy she felt, she ordered
her carriage, and proceeded to visit
her mother, who she found was ill, having
caught cold in coming out of the Opera.

"Why did you not inform me of your
indisposition before, dearest mamma?--I
would have been here early?"

"I know, love, that you would not have
been remiss in any kindness; but when a
woman is married, her first duty is to her
husband; and I fancy," she added, smiling,
and implying by her manner that she knew
more than she would exactly say; "I fancy
Lord Glenmore will occupy more of your
time than ever, dear Georgina, if what is
reported be true."

"I am sure he will never prevent my
coming to you, under any circumstances; but
really he has so much business, that I see
less and less of him every day."

"Indeed!" said Lady Melcomb, looking
rather blank. Fortunately for both parties,
Lord Melcomb came in from his morning
walk, with a countenance even more bright
and cheerful than was his wont. "So, my
love," he cried, "I fear you must now be
no longer my little Georgy, if the current
news be true, I must look at you in a new
light--eh?" and he examined her countenance.

"I am very sorry to hear that, dearest
papa; I was so happy in the old one, that
nothing can make me wish to change in
your eyes."

"Come come, love, tell us now, has Lord
Glenmore accepted the appointment of ----
or not?"

"Whenever he tells me to say that he
has done so, I shall certainly, my dearest
papa and mamma, make you the first to be
acquainted with the event."

"Well, Georgina, I see how it is: you
need not say more, for you are already quite
diplomatic in your mode of answering. But
you are right, my child: whatever confidence
your husband reposes in you, you ought to
regard it as sacred;" and Lord Melcomb
changed the subject like a good and a sensible
man, who wishes really that his child
should prove a good and faithful wife. "You
have given the best earnest any girl can
give," he said, "my sweet Georgina, of being
an invaluable treasure to your husband, by
having first been such to your parents; and
the obedience you paid us should now be
implicitly transferred to Lord Glenmore. The
woman who has not learnt obedience, is likely
to be very unhappy: for it is surely one of
the first duties in every sphere of a woman's
life. You know the lines, that I have
so often repeated to you, and I am sure you
practise them, my own Georgina, as forming
the great golden rule to be observed by
a married woman: one who

/P
"'Never answers till her husband cools;
And if she rules him, never shows she rules.'
P/

"But when I say obedience, I do not mean
that slavish obedience, which in matters of
conscience must remain a question for conscience
to decide; I mean that system of gentle
acquiescence in all the minor motives of
life, which can alone render the domestic
circle a circle of harmony."

Lady Glenmore assured her father she had
not forgotten, and never should forget his excellent
lessons; and that every thing which he
had recommended her to do, she invariably
called to mind every night and morning. Lord
Melcomb had, during a very busy life, acquitted
himself under all circumstances with
credit both abroad and at home, and if he had
leant to the despotic side of governing in his
own house, he had done it with so much gentleness
as well as firmness, that no one felt
inclined to consider the yoke heavy. His
daughter had never even felt it could be so,
for she was by nature and inclination a docile
gentle being, leaning upon those she loved with
implicit confidence for guidance and support.
It was at this particular moment more than
usually sweet to her to be in the society of her
parents, and she promised that if Lord Glenmore
were engaged in the evening, she would
bring her work, and instead of passing the _then_
dull hours at home, find a sweet solace with
them; they were a happy family, united in
the bond of the strictest union, and even at
a temporary parting felt pain, in proportion as
being together gave them pleasure; but it
was time for Lady Glenmore, she said, to go
home, and they separated.

The interview between Lord Glenmore and
Lord D'Esterre that morning had passed to
their mutual satisfaction; their general opinion
of public affairs, and their views of domestic
happiness were too similar for them not to
draw together; and yet there were points of
difference in their character, which tended to
keep alive an awakening interest, and render
the one more necessary to the other; but in
regard to the great question then agitating the
public mind, Lady Tilney was quite mistaken
in her ideas of his principles, which were at
variance in many respects with what she
called _liberalism_.

The fact was, the minister of the day, having
discovered that those whom he had allowed to
continue in office, on agreed and well-defined
principles as to the line they were to pursue
in their political conduct, were acting out of
the pale of their engagements, and forfeiting
the pledges given to himself; consequently,
with that decision of character, and straightforwardness
of conduct, which formed the leading
feature of his life, he availed himself of the
first favourable opportunity of breaking off a
connexion with men, whose moral complexions
were so very unlike his own. Well
knowing how vast were his resources, he
sought among the rising nobility of England
(who, take them altogether, form perhaps, a
body more talented, and more patriotic than
any other nation in the world) for that support
and coadjutancy which the emergency of
the times demanded, in order to maintain
the constitutional rights of the nation. Lord
Glenmore was one of these, and amongst the
parties whom he, in his turn, named as being
those he wished should co-operate with him
in his individual department, Lord D'Esterre
stood pre-eminent. This happy nomination
met at once with the entire approbation of
the minister, whose discernment was as penetrating,
as it was prompt and decisive.

Lord Albert, it may be, in his acceptance of
office, was not influenced alone by political
views. He felt that, in the uncertain and agitated
state of his mind, some great and commanding
power for exertion was necessary to
him; some influential weight of sufficient magnitude
to poise the fluctuations of a mind,
whose energies he was conscious were wasting
themselves in a diseased state of excitement.
He thought that by engaging in a political
career, where the duties imposed were of an
imperious and absorbing nature, he should
best find that refuge against himself which he
deemed it wise to seek. Men in such cases
have most indubitably great advantages over
women; many a noble career lies open to them.
When they are oppressed by any woe of a private
nature, they may in the exercise of their
powers find arms against a sea of troubles;
but women have only one great lesson to
learn, greater still perhaps if duly entertained--to
suffer resignedly.

Lord Glenmore and Lord Albert prolonged
their discussion to a late hour--so late that
Lord Glenmore pressed him to remain and
dine. "We have no company to-day," he said,
"and Lady Glenmore will excuse your toilette."
The invitation was too acceptable to be
refused, and they passed into the drawing-room,
where they found Lady Glenmore all
smiles and beauty; for the idea of enjoying her
husband's company had again restored her to
her wonted placid happiness.

The conversation took that happy course
which it ever does when similarity of tastes
directs the subjects; and as the minds of these
young men were not only of a superior cast,
but their manners too formed on that refined
model which, when it is accompanied by
intellectual power, gives grace to force, their
social intercourse was truly such, as one likes
to think is the sample of a high-born, high-bred
British nobleman.

Lady Glenmore listened with no insipid
mawkish indifference, even to matters beyond
her ken, and the remark she ventured now
and then to slide in was one that bespoke a
diffident, but not deficient understanding. A
delighted glance of approbation occasionally
escaped from Lord Glenmore, in homage to
his wife, and as Lord Albert beheld this married
happiness, he could not help sighing, as
he thought "such might have been mine;" and
he almost unconsciously drew a parallel between
Lady Glenmore and Adeline, in which
he did not deceive himself in giving the decided
palm to the latter.

When he was preparing to depart, he found
it was so late that he drove home; but when
there, the same incapacity to settle himself
to any occupation which he had before experienced,
returned, and he fancied that he
might yet be in time for an hour of the ballet.
So he ordered his carriage, made a brief toilette,
and drove to the Opera-house. "It is too
late," he thought, "to go to South Audley
Street; I shall disturb Lady Dunmelraise;"
but yet the idea that he had not called upon
her that day haunted him painfully.

Arrived at the Opera, he walked in, and
hearing, as he passed the pit-door, a favourite
air sung by Pasta, he made his way through
the crowd, obtained a tolerable place, and was
listening intently to the music, when he was accosted
by Mr. George Foley. The recollection
of what he had suffered the previous evening
came freshly to his feelings, like a dark dense
cloud, obscuring every other idea. Mr. Foley,
either not seeing, or not choosing to see,
the coldness of his reception, pertinaciously
kept up a conversation with him on various
subjects, precisely in that quiet and self-satisfied
manner, which is so insufferable to a person
under feelings of irritation. Nor did Mr.
Foley cease talking till he suddenly turned
round, and saw some one in the boxes, to
whom he nodded with much apparent familiarity
of interest. Lord Albert mechanically
turned his head also, and beheld Lady Hamlet
Vernon--who kissed her hand to him; and
both of them, as if by mutual consent, proceeded
to join her. She was but just arrived, having
been at a dinner at the Leinsengens, she
said, and her face was lit up with more than ordinary
animation as she greeted them on their
entering; then noticing to Lord Albert to
take the seat next her in front of the box, she
bent towards him, so as to whisper in his
ear, "I heartily congratulate you; I have just
heard of the arrangements at the Leinsengens
where I dined, as I have already told you, and
where I heard all the finest things in the world
said of you, as I have not yet told you; but I
assure you the generality of the persons there
were, I really believe, for once sincere in what
they said. But you do not express any satisfaction
at this event yourself: why are you so
exceedingly indifferent?" and her eyes spoke a
language which was any thing but that of indifference.

"Because," he said, "I do not avow that
the news you have heard is true. We must
wait and see the event publicly announced,
before one can have any feeling about it, one
way or the other." Lady Hamlet Vernon continued
to banter him on his cautious reserve
for some time; but did not press the matter
further, as she saw his dislike to being probed
on the subject.

"Only remember," she whispered, "you
have one friend, who enters into all your joys
and sorrows, and feels every thing that betides
you with a keen perception of interest." After
some vain attempts on her part to unite Mr.
Foley in a conversation with them, which she
resumed aloud, he being perfectly aware
that Lord Albert in fact engrossed her completely,
took an early opportunity of withdrawing.
Lord Albert remained till near the close
of the ballet in earnest conversation with Lady
Hamlet Vernon, interrupted only occasionally
by chance visitors, who seeing the preoccupied
air, and observing the thoughtful expression
of Lord Albert, did not long obtrude themselves.
He would probably have remained
where he was till the entire end of the performance,
had not a sudden movement in the
box opposite, attended with bustle, and some
lady apparently fainting, caught his attention.
He looked eagerly again, and in another minute
recognized Lady Delamere, and thought in the
reclining figure that he could trace a likeness
to Lady Adeline Seymour. Hastily rising, he
rushed out of the box, without making any
apology to Lady Hamlet Vernon, or mentioning
the cause of his very abrupt departure.

When he arrived at the opposite side of the
house, he found his fears and conjectures true;
and his heart smote him in an instant, as he
figured to himself what Lady Adeline's feelings
must have been, in seeing him occupied so long
a time, and his attention so intensely fixed
upon another, as he was conscious his had been
on Lady Hamlet Vernon. Although Lady Adeline
might not know who she was, yet the circumstance
of his not having been near her all
day, the reason of which she could not know,
together with the fact which she saw, namely,
that he preferred the society of another to her's,
were all circumstances that struck him with
self-condemnation, and his look, and manner,
implied the full expression of tender penitence.
But Lady Adeline was still insensible;
she could not see, or observe, _what_ his feelings
then were at beholding her thus; but with
Lady Delamere the case was different; he
thought he read in her cold reception of his
offered services, and the penetrating glance
which she cast upon him, her complete
knowledge of all that had passed in his mind
relative to Lady Hamlet Vernon, and he shrunk
confused from her gaze.

This, however, was neither a time nor place
adapted for explanations; and, indeed, to whom
was he to make them? To no one did he feel
responsible but to Adeline; to no one he felt
would they be satisfactory, save to Adeline. He
knew her mind was truth itself, and so utterly
incapable of deception, that she could not believe
that any one would deceive her; he determined
therefore to unbosom himself to her, and be forgiven.
With these feelings, which were rapid
and almost simultaneous in their effect, though
language is slow in expressing them, he
caught the sinking Adeline in his arms, and
lifted her inanimate form into the corridor,
where a seat being hastily taken from the box,
he supported her, kneeling by her side. At
this moment Mr. Foley appeared, breathless
with haste, bearing some water and a smelling-bottle,
which he proceeded to apply, whilst
Lady Delamere aided him in his efforts to restore
Adeline, and was assisted by several
of their acquaintance who were passing by.

Lord Albert could only partially be of use,
as one arm supported her; but with the other
he tenderly pressed her hand as he bathed it
in the water. Animation, after a few minutes,
returned; she opened her eyes, and gazed vacantly;
but in another moment her senses were
fully restored; and on recognizing Lord Albert,
she quickly closed her eyes again, and a sort
of convulsive throb seemed about to make her
relapse; but struggling to disengage her hand,
which he let drop with an expression of sorrow
and dismay, Lady Adeline made an effort
to recover herself; and half rising, she turned
to Lady Delamere, and said inarticulately,
"I should like, dear aunt, to be taken home."

"Stop, for heaven's sake," cried Lord Albert
D'Esterre, stepping forward, as if to catch her
tottering frame; "wait till you are more recovered."

"No," she said; but speaking still as if to
Lady Delamere, "I shall be better when I
am at home; dear aunt, let me go." Lady
Delamere, judging of Adeline's feelings by
her own observations of the circumstances
which she thought had caused her sudden
indisposition, said coolly, addressing Lord
Albert, "Thank you, Lord Albert, but Adeline
is the best judge of her own feelings."
Then turning to Mr. Foley, she asked him
if he had seen her servants. He answered
in the affirmative; and added, "the carriage
will be up by this time certainly."

"Then," rejoined Lady Delamere, "have
the goodness, Mr. Foley, to give your arm to
my niece;" and she continued, with marked
emphasis, "Adeline dear, I will support you
on the other side." It was impossible for
Lord Albert to mistake what this arrangement
implied; his whole frame was convulsed,
though he betrayed no gesture of suffering,
but stood rooted to the spot, as his eyes gazed
on her, walking away feebly between her two
supporters, without thinking of following her;
and then, by a sudden impulse, he rushed
after her, and arrived at the door just in time
to see Mr. Foley get into the carriage, after
having placed the ladies in safety, and to hear
the word "home" pronounced by the footman
as they drove from the door of the Opera-house.

He mechanically turned round, and with an
agitation of mind that allowed not of reflection,
returned to Lady Hamlet Vernon's box. He
sat down without speaking; and, gazing in
vacancy, remained for some time like one in a
deep reverie. Fortunately there was no one in
the box but themselves; and though Lady Hamlet
Vernon was quite aware of his situation, and
partly guessed the cause, she was too deeply
interested herself in the issue of the event to
press indiscreetly into his feelings at that moment,
but simply asked him "if he were not
well?" "Oh, quite well," he replied; "only
rather astonished.--It was,"--he stopped--seemed
to muse again, and then he added to
himself, "they went away together." Lady
Hamlet Vernon's eyes filled with tears--(tears
will come sometimes to some people when they
are called)--she said, in a low voice, "I must
always grieve for what gives you pain; but
I have thought"--she paused.--Lord Albert
fixed his eyes on her for an instant, as if he
would inquire, "what have you thought?" but
the latter, without appearing to deny that she
_had_ thought, at the same time added, in a
hurried tone,

"Yet, my dear Lord Albert, let not my
thoughts weigh with you; let not a momentary
appearance alone decide on any measure
which may influence your whole life; look
dispassionately on appearances; sound them,
sift them thoroughly, ere you allow yourself
to act upon them." There was a gentle reason
in these words, an expression of heart-felt
interest in the speaker, which at the
present instant was doubly efficacious in turning
the current of his thoughts and feelings in
favour of her who uttered them; and he gave
way to a warmth of expression in his reply which
was joy to her heart. Still she repressed the
triumph she felt at this impassioned answer;
and it was only when he handed her to her
carriage, that the pressure of her hand spoke
a tenderer language, which vibrated through
his frame.


END OF VOL. II.


/*
LONDON:
PRINTED BY J. L. COX, GREAT QUEEN STREET.
*/




THE

COURT JOURNAL.


The whole impression of this new and popular weekly
journal being now stamped, subscribers may receive and
transmit it to their friends, POSTAGE FREE, throughout
all parts of the kingdom.

THE PROPRIETORS of the COURT JOURNAL, with due
acknowledgments for the highly gratifying reception their
work has already met with, beg leave to point out to
readers in general the advantages of their publication in
its present improved form.

The occupations, engagements, and amusements of the
higher classes of society had long required a record; they
found it in the Court Journal. The fête champêtre, the
sumptuous banquet, the concert, the soirée, the ball, the
public and private habits of royal and noble life, those
habits which give the tone to manners throughout the
empire, were depicted with a freshness and accuracy
hitherto unattempted; and, in all instances, with the
most attentive avoidance of injury to personal feelings.
It may be easily imagined that those details could not
have been supplied from ordinary sources,--thus the
connexions of the Proprietors afforded them peculiar
opportunities, and many of the articles of the Court
Journal were contributed by individuals, whose rank and
fashion gave even a pledge at once for the good taste
and the truth of their descriptions.

But something more was still required, to realize the
original idea of the publication. It was hitherto the
Journal of an elevated but exclusive class; the purpose
was to render it available to all classes, retaining its
anecdote, pleasantry, and spirit of high life, to make it
the vehicle of intelligence of every interesting kind; the
companion not only of the boudoir but of the breakfast
table and the study,--a Journal in which not merely the
woman of fashion might find the round of her engagements
for the week brought gracefully before her eye;
but the politician, the student, and the various orders of
intelligent society might find the species of information
suited to their purposes; to make the Court Journal a
WEEKLY NEWSPAPER of the most improved and
valuable nature.

For this object a Stamp was necessary, and the Proprietors
did not hesitate to subject themselves to the
serious additional expense, that they might give the public
their paper in its complete state, feeling confident that
the claims of the work to great popularity and extensive
circulation would be duly estimated by the public at large.

THE COURT JOURNAL is regularly published every
SATURDAY MORNING on a handsome sheet of 16 quarto
pages, containing 48 columns, price 10d. and may consequently
be received on Sunday in all parts of the country.
Published for HENRY COLBURN, by W. Thomas, at the
office, 19, Catherine Street, Strand. Orders are received
by all Booksellers and Newsvenders throughout the kingdom;
and those who desire to become subscribers are
particularly requested to give their orders to the Bookseller
or Newsman in their own immediate neighbourhood,
as the best mode of receiving it regularly.

N.B.--Advertisements or orders sent from the country
to the office must be accompanied by a reference for
payment in London.




TRANSCRIBER'S NOTE:

Obvious printer errors have been corrected. Otherwise, the author's
original spelling, punctuation and hyphenation have been left intact.






        
            *** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE EXCLUSIVES (VOL. 2 OF 3) ***
        

    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Exclusives (vol. 3 of 3)
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: The Exclusives (vol. 3 of 3)


Author: Lady Charlotte Campbell Bury

Release date: October 13, 2017 [eBook #55746]

Language: English

Credits: Produced by Chris Whitehead and the Online Distributed
        Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
        produced from images generously made available by The
        Internet Archive)


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE EXCLUSIVES (VOL. 3 OF 3) ***




Produced by Chris Whitehead and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from images generously made available by The
Internet Archive)









  THE
  EXCLUSIVES.

  VOL. III.




  THE
  EXCLUSIVES.

  IN THREE VOLUMES.

  VOL. III.

  SECOND EDITION.

  LONDON:
  HENRY COLBURN AND RICHARD BENTLEY,
  NEW BURLINGTON STREET.

  1830.




  LONDON:

  Printed by J. L. Cox, Great Queen Street,
  Lincoln's-Inn Fields.




THE EXCLUSIVES.




CHAPTER I.

THOUGHTS FOR COUNSEL.


When Lady Delamere returned with her niece, and the latter had been
left in a state of comparative composure to the best of all earthly
restoratives, sleep, Lady Dunmelraise listened with anxious interest
to the relation of her daughter's sudden indisposition, which Lady
Delamere did not hesitate to attribute to her having witnessed Lord
Albert's attentions to Lady Hamlet Vernon during the whole evening, in
the very box opposite to them at the Opera.

"I observed her," said Lady Delamere, "for some time struggling with
her feelings, and hesitated whether it were best to take notice of,
or allow them to subside uncommented upon: seeing, however, that at
length all her efforts were unavailing, and that her agitation rather
increased than the reverse, I judged it necessary to propose our
returning home. At that instant, Adeline fainted; and now, dear sister,
I think that, for Adeline's sake, it is my duty to speak to you without
reserve on the subject of Lord Albert D'Esterre. The state of your
health, on your arrival in London, and the fear of agitating you, have
alone prevented my touching on this subject sooner; but I hope you
will forgive me, and feel that I was right, when I acknowledge that I
have already spoken generally to Adeline herself upon the prospects
attendant on her engagement.

"You will also readily believe, I trust, that, knowing your sentiments
and principles, I could not say any thing that you would disapprove,
nor that I would assume to myself any parental authority, which is
alone your right, in what I said; but at the same time I ventured
upon what I conceived to be Lord Albert's very culpable neglect;
and, although I fear much more might have been said with truth, yet
my counsel went merely to impress on Adeline's mind a sense of the
seriousness of married life, and of the necessity of both parties
examining thoroughly the grounds on which they rest their hopes of
happiness, before they become bound indissolubly together. I also
expatiated upon the propriety of her mixing in the great world
during your stay in London, which would afford her an opportunity of
judging many things which she could not do in a life of retirement.
I added, that the same person is too often not the same, when placed
in different scenes, and with different objects of attraction and
temptation around him; for I wished to open Adeline's eyes to a clear
discernment of whatever might be necessary for her to know; and, having
done this, leave it to her own excellent understanding to draw the
salutary conclusion."

"You are right, my dear sister, and I thank you; but it is strange that
Adeline should never have mentioned this conversation to me. She never
had a secret from me before in her lifetime."

"Do not blame Adeline, I entreat you. If there be any blame any where,
it must rest with me; for dreading the effect which my suspicions might
have produced on your mind, while still suffering from your recent
increase of malady, I could not at that time bring myself to enter upon
a subject which I knew must harass you; and, acquainted as I am with
Adeline's superior prudence and rectitude of conduct,--qualities which
she possesses, indeed, beyond most persons of her age,--I deemed it
quite sufficient to give her that species of warning which would make
her look warily to certain points, respecting the observation of which
her very purity might have blinded her, but yet without saying any
thing sufficiently decided for her to deem it a breach of duty not to
repeat the conversation to you. Having explained this affair, I trust I
have absolved the dear, ingenuous Adeline from the least blame, which
might otherwise have attached to her concealing any thing of importance
from you, her mother."

"Oh certainly, my dear sister; entirely so; and it is needless to dwell
on this longer. The matter of great moment, which I wish to discuss
with you, is, what steps should now be taken in regard to Lord Albert
D'Esterre, for some active measure does appear necessary after this
night's occurrence?"

"Indeed it is a delicate business, and one on which I feel very
diffident in giving advice; but since you ask my opinion, I will not
conceal from you, that Lord Albert's character appears to me to be
much changed since his last visit to you, immediately after his return
from the continent: indeed, how should it be otherwise, when, by
all I can learn, he has associated only with those persons who form
a distinct circle; and amongst whom he must have imbibed, at least
superficially, all those habits and prejudices which are directly
opposed to his former life.

"You knew, my dear sister, that our opinion of that coterie is pretty
much the same; and I believe it to be impossible for a young man to
become entangled in such a society, and not lose all correct principle.
This in itself would be a reason which would make me anxious for our
Adeline's happiness, if she were so connected; for to what dangers
would she not be exposed as a married woman, living in that class of
persons! Notwithstanding her firmness of character, I could not but
dread the contamination of perpetual bad example; and the more so, as
it does not appear in its own appalling form, but wears the semblance
of elegance and innocent pleasure. Thinking of these things, and
knowing, as I do, besides, that not only Lord Albert attaches himself
in particular to one of the circle, (I mean Lady Hamlet Vernon) but
that the world are beginning to talk openly on the subject, I really
think it is time some decision on your part should be taken."

"All that you say makes me very sorrowful, my dear sister," replied
Lady Dunmelraise; "and I see too clearly the truth of your advice not
to follow it; but then, you know, we must consider the dear Adeline's
feelings; we must endeavour to spare her present pain, so far as we
consistently can with future and lasting happiness. But I fear, let the
blow come as it may, it will fall heavily on her. I have myself not
been without my suspicions, as I already told you, of Lord Albert's
change of sentiments in respect to my daughter; but knowing her deep
attachment to him, and dreading the effects of a hasty overthrow of
all her long-cherished hopes, having at the same time no positive
proof of Lord Albert's delinquency, I could do no more, hitherto,
than you have done; that is, speak in general terms of the very great
importance of a strict examination of oneself, and the object of one's
attachment, previously to marriage, not only in regard to the more
weighty considerations of principle and temper, but also in respect to
those habits and pursuits, which either cement the delights of daily
communication, or, if dissimilar, produce at first estrangement, and
in time, it may be, indifference or disgust. Of all these, and such
as these, I spoke minutely, and even ventured to throw out doubts
respecting Lord Albert's occupations and recreations continuing to be
of a nature that accorded with her own. I then hinted at a change of
associates naturally leading to a change of feelings; 'but,' I added,
'you are the only person, my dearest child, after all, who can decide
upon the truth of these observations in this instance; and what I
recommend to you is, to look narrowly yourself to these points, and
employ the interval before your final decision in determining this
momentous question for yourself.'

"Thus far I have spoken to her. Since, however, the scene of to-night
seems to have precipitated matters to a climax,--to the necessity, at
least, of a disclosure of the extent of our fears,--I must endeavour to
break them to her to-morrow in such a manner as will be least likely to
shock her feelings; but, alas! I much fear that the shock has already
been felt, has come to her in its worst and keenest guise, and on such
a heart as hers I dread the consequences. At her years the blight of a
cherished hope is often physically fatal; the frame is not strengthened
to bear the crush of sorrow, and life itself yields to the pressure."
Lady Dunmelraise's voice faltered, and her sister felt an answering
pang to that which she so touchingly expressed. "Still," resumed Lady
Dunmelraise, after a moment's pause, "it will be kinder and wiser, in
as far as respects addressing myself to Lord Albert, to let the matter
take its own course, and end itself. The time when a final decision
must be made is now very short; I shall then have a right to demand an
explicit avowal of his intentions, or to put a final termination to my
daughter's engagement with him.

"Meanwhile, I shall speak unreservedly to her. Now that she has (poor
dear! my heart bleeds for her!) witnessed, at least once, a scene
that confirms all my worst fears, she will be alive to the justice
of my representations, and with her own quickness of perception and
delicacy of feeling, will judge for herself on similar occasions,
should such recur; in which case, the dignity of her offended affection
will strengthen her for the trial: for what we take upon ourselves to
bear is always a burden more easily endured than that imposed upon
us by another. If, however, we should be mistaken; if, haply, we do
Lord Albert injustice; if appearances are deceptive, and that he is
in fact unchanged; we shall have spared much unnecessary pain, and
all self-accusation for undue precipitation." The sisters having thus
settled the point which involved the happiness of one so dear to them,
separated for the night.

Lord Albert D'Esterre, on his part, when he reached home from the
Opera, became the victim of those baffling feelings which had more
than once torn his heart in pieces; for although he felt that he had
stronger grounds than ever to suspect Lady Adeline of a preference
for another, yet so long and so deeply rooted had been his dream of
attachment for her, that at intervals a tide of tenderness returned,
and he involuntarily dwelt on the idea, that one who had been
considered by him as his own, one who professed to feel herself bound
to him, could not, without some fault on his part, prove false to
herself and him. And was he without fault in respect to his treatment
of her? It was a question he did not dare to answer; but he felt sure,
that whatever fancy played on the surface of his heart, Adeline _alone_
was enshrined there; and this assurance came to him with greater power,
as the excitement he experienced while he had been in the society of
Lady Hamlet Vernon gradually died away when no longer in her presence.

The next morning he wavered for a considerable time, whether to go in
person to inquire for Lady Adeline, or merely send; and his feelings
of wounded pride and genuine affection, which latter surpasses all
pride, alternately rose and fell in his breast. "I would not betray
displeasure," he said to himself; "for, if the offence is real,
displeasure would be too weak a feeling for so deep an injury, and,
to a coquette, the knowledge that she gives pain is a triumph: I will
not go, therefore; I will write." And he decided on despatching a
note, pleading important business as the cause of his not attending
personally to inquire for her, which excuse was in part true. After
having so far satisfied himself by doing what he thought best under all
circumstances, he went to Lord Glenmore's, to lose, if possible, the
sense of his sorrow, in matters of so high and engrossing a nature,
that he knew, could any thing prove a cure for love, they must.

Far different, however, from the feelings and thoughts which had
agitated the breast of Adeline, her affectionate relatives, and Lord
Albert himself, were those which agitated Lady Hamlet Vernon. She had
but one thought, one intense interest, and she cared not by what means
she followed up its success. In recalling the last scene in which she
had been an actor, she was not likely to lose sight for a moment of
the advantage she perceived that she had obtained over the object of
her pursuit; and although entertaining little doubt as to the cause of
Lady Adeline's indisposition, she was still anxious to assure herself
that her surmises were right in regard to it, and also to learn the
visible effect which had been produced when Lord Albert hastened to her
in the Opera House; for although she thought she could not be at a loss
to unravel the clue, yet, for a thousand reasons, she was most anxious
to be acquainted, beyond all possibility of doubt, with every thing
respecting the occurrence.

For this purpose, she sent a note, early in the morning, to Mr. Foley,
requesting him to lose no time in calling upon her. He was not tardy in
obeying her summons, and when he came, she cautiously avoided at first
entering upon the subject nearest her heart, and turned his attention
to the circumstance of a change of ministry, asking him if he had heard
any thing decisive on the subject. He repeated what had been reported
the preceding evening, namely, that Lord Glenmore had certainly
accepted office, and Lord Albert D'Esterre a post under him. This led
to the subject of Lady Adeline's indisposition, and the question,
whether the marriage between her and Lord Albert would ever take
place. Mr. Foley replied, that he thought the thing very unlikely. A
man engaged as Lord Albert now was, required, he conceived, a different
sort of wife, if any wife were not _de trop_.

"But what occasioned the scene she made last night?" asked Lady Hamlet
Vernon.

Mr. Foley replied, he thought there could be little doubt as to the
cause; adding, courteously, "You know Lord Albert was in your box all
the evening; and it could hardly be supposed, that any person at all
attached to him could see him engaged in earnest conversation with you
so long a time, without apprehension as to the consequences."

Lady Hamlet Vernon endeavoured to suppress, at least to conceal, the
agitation of pleasure which she felt; and said, smiling, he was always
a flatterer, but that there could be no foundation for the uneasiness
ascribed to Lady Adeline's feelings, and that she was sure there was
some other cause; but really, she added,

"My great interest was to ascertain that _your interests_ were safe in
this ministerial change; and if Lord Albert be really in power, I feel
certain you _have_ nothing to apprehend. As to Lady Adeline Seymour, I
am quite of your opinion; she is not at all calculated to be his wife.
From the interest which Lord Albert has shown in my welfare, I really
have a feeling of regard for him, and I should be sorry to see him
united to a woman who I am certain would not promote his happiness. Now
do _you_ think she would?"

"To confess the truth, I do not believe it. Lady Adeline is very
amiable, very sweet, very simple-minded, but not at all fitted to
play a part in the busy world. I could not imagine her the wife of a
minister, or throwing any degree of lustre round an exalted station.
Elegant and endearing in private life as she certainly is; depend upon
it _that_ is her sphere; take her thence, and she would be nothing."

Lady Hamlet Vernon seemed busy in thought, was silent for a few
moments, then turned to Mr. Foley, and fixing her eyes on his, asked
pointedly,

"But do you think she is fond of Lord Albert?"

"Fond! yes, perhaps so; the fondness of a child that has been told it
ought to love something, and has never made any comparisons whereby to
know what it likes."

"That will _not_ do for Lord Albert D'Esterre, I am certain, and it
would be madness in him to persevere in forming such a union. You, dear
Mr. Foley, are intimate with her mother, Lady Dunmelraise; does she
ever speak to you on the subject?" Then, without waiting for an answer,
Lady Hamlet Vernon went on to say, "If an opportunity _should occur_,
do you not think that, as a friend of the families, you ought to state
your opinion of this unpropitious marriage; I mean without prejudice
to Lord Albert D'Esterre, for I would not for the world be supposed to
say any thing which could be offensive or undervaluing in regard to
him. If you knew him intimately, which I hope you will do, you would, I
feel confident, not only like, but esteem him. It is from my doing so,
who have had opportunities of reading his real character, that I think
it a duty in any friend of Lady Dunmelraise to make her aware that
her daughter is not suited to him, from an opposition of tastes and
pursuits, different habits, and different ends in life, all which would
render a union between them destructive of mutual happiness."

During Lady Hamlet Vernon's conversation, Mr. Foley's countenance
underwent many changes, of which she was at first doubtful how to read
the meaning. At length, after a considerable pause, he replied--"Lady
Dunmelraise has never spoken to me on the business, and I do not see
how I could, with any propriety, touch on any part of the subject on
which we have been conversing, unless, indeed, she were first to open
the matter to me; besides," (he added, with increasing agitation,) "an
attempt of the kind, on my part, would most probably defeat the end, as
Lady Dunmelraise might suppose such advice, coming from me, was perhaps
influenced by wishes and views of my own, and I would not----."

"You would not," interrupted Lady Hamlet Vernon, "so far confess the
truth, for I see plainly that you yourself love Lady Adeline," keeping
her eyes on him as she spoke. Mr. Foley hesitated; he seemed to wish to
answer her, but knew not how.

"Now do not, my dear Mr. George Foley, from any false delicacy, be
desirous of concealing the truth from me: you do love Lady Adeline
Seymour; and if so, why should you not urge your suit? For _you_, I
conceive this alliance to be very desirable; it is quite different with
regard to Lord Albert D'Esterre. A quiet, simple, domestic companion,
such as you pourtray Lady Adeline to be, would prove exactly consonant
with your wishes; her fortune is vast; and the general tenor of her
education and life were well adapted to form her character to that
sort of tranquil obedience which I know you deem a prime requisite in
a wife. Lady Dunmelraise's interest in you is a great step in your
favour; fortune to you is a _great object_; and the marriage would be
such as would, I think, contribute to your wishes and your welfare."

Lady Hamlet Vernon saw that she had touched a theme in which Mr.
Foley's interests were deeply involved; for as she proceeded to
expatiate on the various advantages which would attend Mr. Foley's
adopting her advice, he listened with more and more attention, and even
betrayed the greatest apparent pleasure. Lady Hamlet Vernon marked
the progress she had made, and felt sure that the discovery at which
she had now arrived, of the coincidence of his feelings with her own,
laid a sure foundation for the accomplishment of her plans, while, at
the same time, it removed from herself, in a great measure, the danger
of being thought to be the principal mover in a matter which required
so much tact and delicacy to carry it through successfully: she saw
clearly, that it was only requisite, by following up her counsel to
Mr. Foley (which was in fact to confirm him in his own wishes), to
overcome any scruples which he might have entertained, from the fear
of appearing to act on selfish motives alone; and Lady Hamlet Vernon
was confident, from this conversation, that she had already made very
great progress. It had required only a spark to set the train on fire;
and she felt certain that every word she uttered would render him more
alive to the true state of his feelings, and consequently more apt to
betray them in his conduct towards Lady Adeline.

Lady Hamlet Vernon had too much knowledge of the world, and of human
nature, to press the matter further at the present moment, or to
attempt to bind, by any direct promise, a person who only required the
spring of his desires to be set in action, in order to play his own
part. Mr. Foley, too, seemed little inclined, at the present moment, to
enter any further on the subject, and by tacit consent it was suffered
to drop; but when he took leave of Lady Hamlet Vernon, it was only a
natural consequence of the counsel she had given him, that he should
bend his steps towards South Audley-street, to make his inquiries for
Lady Adeline. How easy is it for the stronger to direct the weaker mind
to good or evil, without exciting any suspicion in the latter that it
is assuming the mastery, or doing any thing but what it meant to do of
its own proper movement; and what small occurrences sometimes determine
a line of conduct either virtuously or the reverse!

Thus it was with Mr. George Foley in the present instance. It certainly
had crossed his mind more than once, that Lady Adeline Seymour would
make him a very eligible wife, and his affections (such at least as he
could have entertained for any object, _blazé_ and apathetic as he had
become from a long course of idleness and dissipation) had undoubtedly
been directed towards her; but the knowledge of the existing engagement
between Lord Albert D'Esterre and herself, and a certain apprehension,
frequent in timid minds that are neither quite good nor quite bad, lest
he should forfeit Lady Dunmelraise's protection, had always checked
his hopes, and kept these aspirations in subjection: but it required
only the suggestions of one somewhat less timid than himself on this
head, to direct his views to a determined pursuit of the object; and he
resolved, with proper caution, to feel his way, but, at the same time,
to lose no opportunity of following up Lady Hamlet Vernon's advice.




CHAPTER II.

A VISIT TO THE NEW-MADE MINISTER'S WIFE.


When Lord Albert had sent his note of inquiry to Lady Adeline Seymour,
he proceeded to Downing-street to meet Lord Glenmore, there to enter
on his official duties; and, notwithstanding the agitation of his mind
on other subjects, he went prepared to commence his new career with
that glow of ardour, which, when tempered by prudence, is so conducive
to honourable success. The reports which had so strongly prevailed for
the last two days in the great world, of Lord Glenmore's appointment
in the ministry, and of Lord Albert D'Esterre's being joined with him
in the office which he had accepted, were now confirmed by a public
announcement of the changes that had taken place.

Of course there were different opinions as to the eligibility of the
measures resorted to, as there always are in similar cases; but which
were, for the most part, formed according to the interests and wishes
of opposing parties, without any real feeling or care for the public
welfare: but, fortunately for the well-being of that public, there
are higher powers over-ruling the petty engines of mortal government,
and even the evil passions of mankind are sometimes made subservient
to the ways of Providence. Henry the Eighth, when he threw off the
papal yoke, and became an instrument of mighty and effective operation
in the religious and moral destinies of Britain, thought little of
any other end than that of securing his own illicit and ambitious
projects; but in his day and generation he was the appointed means to
bring about that invaluable constitution, which, resting on a firmer
basis than mere worldly wisdom could devise, we may be confident will
always have able defenders raised up for its support--whether they be
those who pursue worldly ends alone, and entertain no other dream in
their philosophy, or whether some hand of conscientious and religious
principle guide the helm: not that the choice of persons can therefore
be indifferent, for human means are still to be employed for human
measures; only that in this circumstance, as in all others, there
remains a point of confiding refuge to flee to, even when the political
horizon appears to good men overcast.

At the present season, when difficulties of an almost insurmountable
nature seemed to gather round the minister, and to impede the easy
course of government, the accession of such a man as Lord Glenmore,
whose character stood too high for any suspicion to attach to his
integrity, and whose situation was too independent to admit the surmise
of his being influenced by motives of personal interest, was a matter
of the last importance: the same might in a degree be said of Lord
Albert D'Esterre, with the exception that he was younger, and that this
was his first step in the career of his public life.

To Lady Tilney and her political friends, the recent changes were
certainly any thing but agreeable; for, so long as Lord Glenmore
remained unconnected with party, she considered that he was yet to
be gained over to that whose interests she espoused: and Lord Albert
D'Esterre having likewise taken the same course, was an additional
cause of regret to her; for she had looked upon him as a much
easier prize than the other, and one of nearly equivalent value. It
was therefore with unqualified disappointment that she heard the
confirmation of those fears which the current whisper of the preceding
days had not prepared her to receive with calmness.

On Lady Hamlet Vernon, this circumstance acted with a different
effect. When she heard the intelligence of the changes in the
ministry confirmed, she considered it as an additional circumstance
of self-congratulation, superadded to those which had arisen from the
occurrence at the Opera and her conversation with Mr. Foley. Lady
Hamlet Vernon, though ambitious, was a person attached to no party; and
though the love of power was predominant in her nature, it was for the
sake of its own exercise, without any reference to any political side
of the question: she only saw, therefore, in Lord Albert's appointment,
the first step towards a career which would involve him at once in
absorbing interests, and leave his mind more easy to be diverted into
a channel in accordance with her wishes, and more likely to be drawn
off from that attachment which was destructive of them. She thought
too, and with some probability, that it was a measure which would be
discordant with Lady Adeline's views of private happiness, and might
possibly therefore influence the fulfilment of the engagement between
her and Lord Albert D'Esterre.

Whilst the parties in question took these two opposite views of the
business, there was a third who deplored it in all sincerity of heart,
and already sickened under the idea of the protracted absences, and
the bustle of the public career, in which she was alternately either to
be the sufferer, or be called upon to share: with the sense, however,
of submission due in a wife to the interests and views of her husband,
she prepared to receive the congratulations of her friends, and to
fulfil the duties which she foresaw must attend on her situation, with
as much cheerfulness and alacrity as she could command.

Lord Glenmore having told her that concealment was no longer necessary
respecting the arrangements now finally adjusted, he bade her in
the course of the day acquaint her family with the event; and, on
his leaving her, she immediately communicated the intelligence to
her parents. The first to congratulate her was Lord Melcombe, who
considered the matter as a piece of good fortune, and rejoiced in this
addition to his child's happiness. While offering his fond wishes for
Lord Glenmore's success, he added, with a smile;

"I think, Georgina, he ought to be satisfied with your first _coup
d'essai_ in diplomacy, for you almost persuaded me yesterday that this
event was quite as improbable as my own appointment to office."

In the course of the day a host of friends--for what persons in power
ever lacked these?--called to pay their compliments to the wife of the
newly-created minister: some came from curiosity, some in sincerity,
some with envious feelings, and some with views of interest. Among
those of the latter class may be enumerated the Leinsengens, the
Tenderdens, and the Tilneys, with smiles on their lips and detraction
in their hearts; the one not believing Lady Glenmore's indifference
to her situation to be real, and the other two, who knew her better,
despising her for her childish folly.

"Well, my dear," said the Comtesse Leinsengen, entering her apartment
like a figure made of clock-work, that glides into the room on a stand,
"let me see how you do look under this _changement de decoration_;
just the same, I declare! _est il bien possible_?" Staring at her,
"_Tout cela ne vous fait ni froid ni chaud_--dat is _impossible_. _Au
reste_--you seem de very ting for your _poste, et je vous en fait mon
compliment_; for you will never be at a loss to know vat countenance
_tenir_, as yours does not undergo any change." The beautiful colour
which tinged Lady Glenmore's cheek at this speech proved the contrary,
as she replied;

"You are mistaken, Comtesse; there are many things which would affect
me in a lively manner; and indeed the present subject of your
congratulations is far from indifferent to me; but----."

"_Allons donc, une confidence_; at last we shall know what you do or do
not care for," interrupted the Comtesse Leinsengen.

"As far as that confidence goes, certainly. I do not care, for
instance, in the least, either for power or place, in as far as regards
myself, and I prefer a quiet country life to that of London; but as my
husband has considered it right to take this step, I must teach myself
to like it too." The announcement of Lady Tenderden and Lady Tilney
interrupted this uncongenial _tête-à-tête_; and the latter, to hide her
chagrin and disappointment under an apparent friendly zeal, flew up
to Lady Glenmore in her most energetic manner, and assured her, that
although she could never agree with Lord Glenmore in politics, yet from
personal regard she sincerely wished him joy of his public success,
and hoped, that now he had the ball at his foot, he would use it to a
good purpose. "It is one thing to be at the bottom of the ladder, and
another upon it," she added; "and perhaps we may see Lord Glenmore
doing as so many others have done before now, looking down on his old
prejudices and mistakes, and taking up quite a different view of the
subject."

Lady Glenmore was silent, but received Lady Tilney's expressions
of kindness with her usual sweetness and courtesy of manner. Lady
Tenderden joined in the congratulation.

"At length, my sweet lady," she said, "you are enthroned, and we all
come to do you homage. But how very discreet you were; never betrayed
by word, look, or gesture, the secret which you were quite sure of; you
are really cut out for the part you have to play. I envy you _votre
petite air moue et doucereux_; don't you, Lady Tilney?"

"Nothing can be better," she replied; "I prophesy that she will play
her part well."

"You are all exceedingly obliging," Lady Glenmore replied, "but I have
no part to play. My husband, being in the ministry, luckily does not
impose any duty upon me, besides that of living more in the world than
I might otherwise do."

"Poor lady, I pity you!" said Lady Tenderden ironically.

"You will change your ideas, I foresee that," said Lady Tilney
prophetically.

"You will remain just vat you are," said the Comtesse Leinsengen
impertinently, when the door opened, and the Duke of Mercington entered.

"I beg you to receive my warmest congratulation, my dear Lady
Glenmore," he said, approaching her in his most _empressé_ manner, as
if his whole heart was in his words, and bowing to the other ladies
slightly as he passed them. "I give you and Glenmore joy alike; him
that he has gained his wish, and you in the consciousness that he has
done so; for I know that your happiness must be _mutual_ to render it
really happiness."

"Oh, duke, I assure you all your compliments are trown away upon dat
ladi, on dat subject at least, for she declare not to like to be a
minister's wife at all."

"Impossible! she is joking," replied the duke, looking at Lady Glenmore
with one of those apparently ingenuous smiles which habit had forced
upon his features, and which once were captivating so long as they
_were_ natural; "impossible that you who were formed to shine in
society should shrink from a situation for which you are so singularly
well adapted."

"You are too good, duke, and I accept your flattering judgment upon
_credit_, for I have not been tried yet, and I _may_ disappoint you."

"Oh never, we all know how charming you are; don't we, Lady Tilney?"

"Yes, duke, you know we all bow to your judgment in every thing,
and I am sure we shall not begin to differ on _this_ point," she
replied, with an air of pique that was ill concealed under an affected
_bonhommie_.

"We are not come here," said the Leinsengen, whispering to Lady
Tenderden, "to listen to all his _fadaises_; _c'est le radotage_
dat we have been used to hear uttered by turns to every object of a
fresh _engouement_ for these last ten years." Then gliding up to Lady
Glenmore, she added, "I am quite charmed to see you _en des mains si
sures_, persons who vill give you such excellent advice; and now dat I
have rendered you _mes hommages_, I make _mes adieus_. Monsieur le duc,
I hope to see you at my next _levée_; Lady Glenmore of course; Lady
Tilney, _au revoir_." And then, when she reached the door, "_Ah ça_,
by de way, vill you, Lady Tenderden, go vid me to-night to _le théàtre
Français_?"

"I should be delighted, but I am engaged to Lady Glenmore. Is not this
our evening?" turning to the latter.

"Yes; but I beg you will not consider that binding."

"Oh but I do, though, so _you must go with me_."

"Of course," said the Comtesse Leinsengen contemptuously, "I am
extremely sorry, _mais il faut se consoler_;" and turning, she glided
away, but first whispered to Lady Tilney as she passed, "We shall have
nothing now but this tiresome _petite nouveauté_;" and she shrugged her
shoulders and departed.

"What is the matter with the comtesse?" asked the Duke of Mercington;
"that _air d'imperatrice enragée_ does not at all become her."

"No," replied Lady Glenmore, laughing, "I never knew any one that it
did."

"Some persons," rejoined the duke, "some dark beauties, may look well
under the effect of a storm, though I confess I had always rather see
the lambent flame than the forked lightning;" and he looked his implied
admiration of Lady Glenmore.

Lady Tilney did not know exactly what part to play in a scene where she
felt she was not the principal, although it is said there have been
times and seasons when she thought it politic to kiss _even the foot
of a person_ placed in a situation of imaginary greatness, and whose
favour she forgot herself so far as to court. She had come, however,
to Lady Glenmore with other views than either those of curiosity or
congratulation. Lady Tilney felt, that in the situation which Lady
Glenmore now held, she might with ease have led a party in society
independent of Lady Tilney or any of her coterie; and a fear that she
might take this step determined her on endeavouring, by counsel and an
assumption of directing how Lady Glenmore should conduct herself in her
station, to obtain in the first instance an influence over her, and
hold her in subserviency to her own wishes regarding society. She saw,
therefore, the Duke of Mercington and several others, who had come and
gone on the same errand, take their leave with satisfaction, and seized
the first moment when she was alone with Lady Glenmore to say:

"Now, my dear Lady Glenmore, you, I am sure, will believe, that of all
who have paid their court to you on this happy event, there is no one
more sincere than myself: but I will go a step further than any other
of your friends, though perhaps I may be giving you offence; I would
counsel, I would advise you; for yours, my dear Lady Glenmore, you will
find to be a situation of some delicacy: there will be so many ready
to take offence if you do not do all they ask or expect of you; and
yet, you know, you must not _compromettez_ yourself, nor our society;
you must, in short, be discreet, and not _too good-humoured_. It will
require great tact to please those whom I am sure you wish to please,
and to give offence to none. Now Glenmore will be constantly engaged,
and you cannot expect him to give due attention to these _affaires de
société_. I really wish, that if ever you feel in any difficulty, you
would consider me as your friend, always ready to serve you; apply
to me, and I will give you my best advice: there are many, I know,
who will be ready to do the same thing by you, but beware of those in
whom you repose confidence. For instance, between ourselves, there is
the Comtesse Leinsengen, who is very charming, very clever, but not
sufficiently aware _how our_ society must be constituted, as indeed
no foreigners possibly can or ever will be, and not at all capable of
guiding intricate points connected with it: and then, you know, she is
_diplomate_ by nature and art; she will of course endeavour to win you
to an intimacy. At least, _c'est son metiér_. But again, I say, beware
of this, or you will compromise Lord Glenmore as well as yourself.
Against Lady Tenderden, too, though there is nobody I like better, you
must also be upon your guard; for she is not altogether to be trusted,
and she will betray your secrets from habit."

Lady Glenmore, who had, hitherto, listened to this long harangue in
silence, and without showing any emotion, now looked a little surprised
at this last caution given by Lady Tilney, for she remembered the
opinion her husband had pronounced on Lady Tenderden; but still she
said nothing. The expression, however, which played in her countenance,
was not unobserved by Lady Tilney, as she added, "Oh, I know what _you_
are thinking; Lady Tenderden _is_ a great favourite with Lord Glenmore;
but it's an old friendship, and now he is married, of course all that
will be on another footing."

Lady Glenmore blushed, and felt the tears rising to her eyes, at the
renewal of an insinuation respecting her husband, which had once
before cost her much acute pain. Lady Tilney did not choose to observe
the effect which she saw her words had produced on the innocent Lady
Glenmore, and proceeded to object, in rotation, to every one whom she
thought might become powerful rivals in her influence over her. Then,
having proceeded to discuss every point political and influential
in society, and having persuaded Lady Glenmore to fix an early day
for a _cercle choisie_ at her house, and canvassed the pretensions of
the persons who were to be allowed to form it, she at length took her
departure, leaving Lady Glenmore perfectly overcome with the torrent of
eloquence and advice which she had so gratuitously given.

While these empty insincerities, these crooked policies of polite life,
had been passing under Lady Glenmore's roof, and while Lord Albert
D'Esterre was busied in the graver but perhaps not less intricate and
deceptive details of _public_ affairs, the realities of whose endless
mazes he had that morning for the first time entered upon, Lady
Dunmelraise, in a far different scene, and on a far other occasion, was
preparing for one of the most painful tasks that duty demands of true
affection; that of probing the breast of a beloved object, with the
moral certainty of its being right so to do, in the hope of protecting
it from yet more cruel wounds. These are the heroisms of private life,
which pass unknown and unhonoured by the world, although they are
noted elsewhere, and are of frequent occurrence in the annals of daily
existence; and it was under the pressure of this painful determination
that Lady Dunmelraise passed a sleepless night, endeavouring to prepare
herself for to-morrow's duty.

When she met her daughter at breakfast, her pale and altered
countenance half spoke the nature of her intended counsel before
she gave it utterance. Lady Adeline's own feelings were too much in
accordance with her mother's, for her not to read the cause of the
expression she saw painted on her face; and although she had forced
herself to leave her apartment, and to appear at the usual hour, and
even endeavoured to wear her own placid smile, in order not to give
Lady Dunmelraise unnecessary anxiety, still the very endeavour betrayed
the real state of her heart. The business of the breakfast passed
mechanically and in silence, with the exception of an interchange of
those few kindly monosyllables which convinced them mutually of the
participation each took in the other's anguish; and while Lady Adeline
was trying to suppress starting tears, Lady Dunmelraise determined to
break this cruel silence, and without preamble to come at once to the
subject.

"My dearest Adeline, I need not tell you, love, that I feel with you
the sorrow and mortification of the occurrence of yesterday evening;
and it has come with double force on me, seeing the anguish it has
brought upon you. However much I may have been prepared for it by what
I have observed in Lord Albert's altered manner, yet I confess I am
surprised at the want of openness in his conduct, a want with which
I never should have thought he could have been charged. Love, it is
true, is easily directed into a new channel, unless religious principle
confirm it in its original course; but even where there is no sin,
according to the world's acceptation of sin in such change, still, from
the opinion I have hitherto entertained of his natural disposition,
I thought he would, with that ingenuousness of character for which I
have given him unbounded credit, have at least confessed the truth
openly; a line of conduct which, had he adopted, I am confident that,
however heavily the avowal might have fallen on your heart, there
would yet have remained a consolation in thinking that he was still
worthy of your esteem, and then an honest pride of the consciousness of
self-desert would have come in aid to sustain you to bear up against
desertion. I begin, however, to fear that esteem can have no part in
our sentiment towards him; for why should concealment be necessary,
if, at least, the cause of his estrangement from us were worthy of
himself?" Lady Adeline covered her face with her hands, as she rested
her arms on the table before her, and her tears trickled through her
delicate fingers, but she could not speak. "Calm yourself, my dearest
Adeline; for my sake, for your own sake, for resignation's sake, bear
up under this heavy affliction: it is a sore and early trial for you, I
well know; but if rightly entertained, it will bring its blessing with
it, as all our trials do. I do not mean to pretend that you are not to
suffer, or give a cold unfeeling philosophy to still the throbbings of
a young wounded heart; but I would lead you to sources of consolation,
which, although they may seem harsh and bitter at first, will in time,
and with God's blessing, have a beneficial effect."

"I know," replied Lady Adeline, making an effort to speak, "I know,
dearest mamma, that all you say is meant in love, and is balm to me,
but these tears, these sobs, must have their course."

Lady Dunmelraise replied to this natural appeal with answering tears;
and having first regained composure, she went on to say:

"Think for a moment, my best child, how hopeless, how truly wretched,
would have been your situation, had you, when united to Lord Albert,
discovered, when it was too late, that his affections were not
entirely yours; and that he had, on his part, either from motives of
false delicacy, or, from what was still worse, a desire to possess your
fortune, persisted in fulfilling an engagement in which his heart at
best had a divided interest;--think, dearest, what would have been your
feelings in _such_ a case, and how mercifully you are dealt by in the
present suffering, in comparison of the irremediable sorrow which would
then have been your portion!

"I need not now recall to your mind what I said on Lord Albert's
apparently altered state of feelings on our arrival in town. You, I am
certain, saw the change as well as myself, and felt it,--how deeply,
I hardly can bear to think; though we both seemed tacitly to agree,
that it would be better to await the result, than precipitate it by
any premature remarks, either to himself, or between each other.
And indeed this conduct, in a great measure, it is still my opinion
should be preserved; only, in as far as regards ourselves, my dearest
child, neither my sense of duty, nor my sense of sorrow, will permit
of longer silence on a subject which, I grieve to confess, judging by
appearances, is already settled; and it is with a view to prepare you
for such an issue, rather than to direct you to show any alteration
in your conduct towards Lord Albert, that I have thus spoken: when I
say show _no_ alteration, it is impossible that that advice could be
literally followed, after having seen a person avowedly under the most
sacred engagement to yourself pass the entire evening in the society
of another, whose general character will not authorize the supposition
that such attentions were without an especial object, and that too on a
day on which he had pleaded important business as his excuse for your
not seeing him; but what I mean by your showing no alteration of manner
towards him is, that neither our opinions nor our decisions should be
made known to him in this stage of the business."

Lady Adeline had now mastered herself sufficiently to listen with
calmness to all her mother said; and she had drawn a seat near her, and
held Lady Dunmelraise's hand tenderly in hers, replying by a gentle
pressure to the sentiments she uttered: and now, when she could again
give her thoughts utterance, she said:

"Speak on, dearest mamma, for even my rebel heart is soothed by
listening to your gentle voice."

Lady Dunmelraise continued, "There are many reasons, you see, love, for
this line of conduct:--

"In the first place, we have only, my sweet child, our own observations
and surmises to guide us; and although these, I grant, are strong,"
(Lady Adeline sighed heavily in answer to this remark) "yet to act upon
them would look like forcing Lord Albert to an immediate decision,
a step unwise, and unworthy of us, and whichever way it ended would
leave a doubt whether the decision were entirely from his heart or
not. Besides, as yet he may have erred, and perhaps become penitent;
if so, his own spontaneous confession alone could be a surety for
his sincerity. Then too, my love, I must also remind you, that by
nothing do a young woman's prospects suffer so much, on her first
entry into life, as by becoming the object of the world's observation
and idle talk, especially on the subject of a disappointment in love
or marriage. All that the generality of the world know at present,
concerning the existing engagement between yourself and Lord Albert,
is, that your dear father and his parents having considered that you
were by birth, fortune, and apparently by disposition when children,
united to each other; should you grow up, mutually entertaining the
same affection which you then evinced, that in such a case your union
would be a matter of congratulation to the families of both parties.
In short, it was one of those alliances that are often talked of
amongst children seemingly adapted to each other, but to be finally
dissolved or fulfilled, as circumstances should hereafter decide.

"How far your own affections have become bound up in this engagement,
or how far Lord Albert has proved himself worthy or not of the intended
union, is hitherto a matter wholly unknown, and uncared for, by the
world at large: but now, however, that you are in the scene of London,
young, new, and with various extraneous advantages to excite envy,
if the affair were made a topic of discussion, the ill-natured part
of the community will be too glad to seize upon any _esclandre_ that
might answer them for a nine days' novelty; and such a hazard, your own
delicacy will point out to you, is therefore carefully to be avoided.
Till lately, the happy termination of our wishes had seemed probable,
and you, dearest child, have, I fear, given way to the belief that it
was impossible it should fail: but, however painful it may be to us
both, in the several relations in which we stand implicated in this
business, it is, you will allow, some satisfaction to think, that the
sacredness of these feelings will not necessarily be broken in upon by
a vulgar prying public; and that, in short, the world need know no
more of the matter than what I have already stated.

"We have only, therefore, as I before remarked, to await the period
when decision must of course be made; that will be when we are in
the country, and when we shall escape all the unpleasant remarks
which would take place were we actually on the scene. Let me hope
also, dearest Adeline, that your eyes being self-opened to the
disappointment, you will know where to seek for succour against
yourself, and which alone can enable you to bear the blow, come when it
may."

"Indeed, dearest mamma," said Lady Adeline, with that under tone of
voice that seems to fear its own sound, "whatever pain I endure, I
perfectly agree with you in all you have said, and implicitly yield to
your counsel; not only because it is my duty and interest to do so, but
because I see the matter exactly in the same light. Oh, I could have
borne all, had Albert only been more open and honest with me: but why
was he so cruel as to deceive me? why was he so tenderly affectionate
to me at Dunmelraise, after his return from abroad? why did he write to
me so kindly? why has he, since we have been in London even, made such
constant allusions to past and future happiness? Why all this, and
then so suddenly and cruelly neglect me for another? for I am sure he
does love another; mamma, do you not think he does?"

"Alas! what comfort can I give you? You have seen with your own eyes,
and I must refer you, love, to your own feelings; who can so well tell
all things as they?"

"But, dearest mamma, do you not think, that if he really did love
another he would have told me so?"

"Why, dearest, it is difficult to reply to that question. Albert's good
feelings and principles could not be overthrown at once. It is never
thus. In a vicious career, people become unprincipled and hardened by
degrees. He may have found his heart estranged from you, and yet in the
first instance have been ashamed to own it, even to himself. The first
step to evil is the _deceitfulness_ of sin: with how many subterfuges
does it not conceal its true nature: it blinds the eyes, lest, looking
upon its native deformity, it should terrify its victim. There is
nothing so likely to have this fatal tendency, as the constant society
and intercourse with persons whose conduct, if not licentious (though I
fear too many of them deserve that epithet), is yet not guided by any
fixed or determined principle of action; whose lives at best are spent
from day to day without any serious thought, and without regard to any
thing but selfish indulgence. Albert has great influence, and there may
be more reasons than one why the party with whom he seems at present to
associate should wish to entangle him. I augured ill of his happiness
from the moment I heard of the circle in which he lived; and it came
to me with as much surprise as sorrow, for I never could have thought
to find one of his dispositions and habits (setting aside principle)
making such a choice of society. This it is which leads me to suppose
that some stronger power of evil than a mere love of idle pleasure has
lured him into the danger. But let this be your greatest comfort, that
you are not his wife, and are not to be thrown among persons of such
a stamp as his present associates; for whatever worldly advantages
they may possess, I should tremble for you, my dear child, were you
cast into a situation of such imminent peril to reason and to virtue.
A woman, to a certain extent, must mingle with the associates of her
husband; and such as these are, so in time must become, likewise, her
own character: for however incongruous they may be to her tastes and
feelings at first, yet if she is young, inexperienced, and pliant, the
brilliancy and polish of their exterior, and their whole attractions,
must dazzle and mislead her better judgment; and from the idea alone of
pleasing her husband, in as far as virtue and religion do not seem to
forbid it, she will conform herself to the habits and manners of those
around her, not being aware how these re-act again upon the general
tone of her own character."

"But perhaps," said Lady Adeline timidly, and while a feverish flush of
hope and tenderness deepened in her cheek, "perhaps, were I his wife, I
might reclaim----."

"Ah, dearest child," interrupted Lady Dunmelraise, "never hazard
evil that good may come of it; never rely upon such a precarious
contingency, nor upon your own strength; seek not temptation,--that is
presumptuous. Were you indeed his wife--as there is every reason at
present to be thankful you are not--then would have come the duty of
_that_ trial; but now another is appointed you, my love. Let us take
what is, and think only of that. We must not wilfully rush into danger,
to indulge selfish gratification."

Lady Adeline threw herself into her mother's arms, and wept
unrestrainedly. "My dearest child, it has been a painful task to me to
give you pain. Soothe this anguish, I beseech you, and assist me in
the performance of what I feel is my duty, by regaining as much command
over yourself as you possibly can."

While Lady Dunmelraise was yet speaking, a servant brought in a note
addressed to Lady Dunmelraise: it was from Lord Albert. She opened,
and having read it, gave it to Lady Adeline, who had known by its
very twist who it came from, and was in breathless anxiety to see its
contents.

"It is worded kindly," said Lady Dunmelraise, "but he could not do
otherwise; and at the same time, I dare say, he felt much awkwardness,
and did not know how to come in person. I shall answer it, my love, in
the same spirit of gentleness; merely saying you are quite recovered,
only suffering the remains of languor after the sickness produced by
the heat of the Opera last night. And if Lord Albert should call in the
course of the day, do, I entreat you, betray no unusual symptoms of
agitation."

Lady Adeline, with an aching head and still sobbing breath, promised
acquiescence; and in despite of herself, a ray of hope seemed to
emanate from the note, which cheered her, she scarce knew why, and
enabled her to suppress her emotion. Then retiring to her own chamber,
she there sought in prayer that strength and resignation which she knew
no earthly comforter could bestow on her.

After the exhaustion of spirits which this conversation with her
daughter had produced, Lady Dunmelraise felt the promised visit of
her sister would be a cordial to her; nor did she wait long ere Lady
Delamere came. As soon as the latter was made acquainted with what had
passed, she said, "Dear Adeline! I expected this from her; yet her
behaviour is super-eminently amiable on this occasion, and must reward
you for all your sorrows. I perfectly agree with you on the policy of
the line of conduct you are to adopt with Lord Albert; and in pursuance
of this, should you not call upon the Tresyllians? You know they are
arrived."

"Certainly I will; for although my health has for many years precluded
my mixing with the world, and exonerated me from all visiting, I shall
forego my general rule, and call on them without delay."

"Come with me now," said Lady Delamere; "my carriage is at the door,
and I will bring you home again." To this proposal the sisters agreed,
and they departed together. The Tresyllians were not at home, and
Lady Dunmelraise felt glad to escape the meeting. On her return, she
learnt from Adeline, whom she found admirably serene and composed,
though pale, and with her eyes swollen with weeping, that Lord Albert
had not been there. The fact was, that the latter had been in reality
occupied the whole day; and it was only on his return to his house,
late in the afternoon, that he received Lady Dunmelraise's answer to
his note, his mind having been as it were forcibly taken off from
the subject nearest to his heart. He had profited by that wholesome
constraint which the occupations of men afford them, and prevents that
musing of the tenderer feelings which enervates and unfits for useful
exertion. Something like reason, and the distinct perception of things
which it never fails to bring in its train, had consequently resumed a
sway over him; and, when this was the case, his heart could not avoid
turning to the object of its first pure and honourable affection with
that ineffable sweetness of sensation that attends on innocent and
happy love. Then, half forgetting, half scorning, the suspicions he
had entertained, and which the scene of the preceding evening had but
too plausibly confirmed, he determined to call in South Audley-street
to see Lady Dunmelraise at least, if not Adeline; and as he walked
along, absorbed in mingled feelings that made him insensible to all the
noise and bustle of the busy crowd he passed through, he found himself
quickly at the door: his hand was on the knocker, when a cabriolet
drove up, and out of it stepped Mr. Foley.

All Lord Albert's philosophy was overthrown by this incident; all
his love for and trust in Lady Adeline was destroyed; and his first
impulse was to leave a house in which he conceived he had no longer any
interest in seeking its inhabitants. But, the next moment, his better
judgment, if not his pride in not seeming to yield to a successful
rival, determined him to fulfil his first intention; and making rather
a cold and haughty return to Mr. Foley's salutation, they both entered
the door together.




CHAPTER III.

THE FRENCH PLAY.


It was late when Lady Glenmore returned from Lady Melcombe's; and as
she drove home she pleased herself with the idea of talking over with
her husband the insipid and insignificant scene of the morning, as well
as losing in his society the recollection of those uneasy feelings
respecting Lady Tenderden, which Lady Tilney's allusion to past times
had created: and then glowed in her breast the one natural, honest
hope, which was ever uppermost in Lady Glenmore's heart, of meeting her
husband for the simple, single pleasure she enjoyed of _being in his
presence_.

"Is Lord Glenmore come home?" was her first question when she alighted
from her carriage: the "No" was chilling.

"Did he leave any message? has he sent any note?" Still "No, no,"
sounded heavily in her ears. She prepared, however, for his return,
by taking more pains with her toilette than usual; and when she had
finished arraying herself, not according to the code of the _Belle
Assemblée_ or _Feuilles des Modes_, but in accordance with that of her
own young innocent face, her glass told her she had not done so in
vain. She then sat for some time with tolerable patience, first taking
up one book, then another, then throwing them down again; going to the
instrument, touching a few chords; turning over the ornamented leaves
of a Lilliputian music-book, invisibly written with a crow-quill;
pushing it away, leaving it to tumble down off the desk as it might,
and going to the window, the shutters of which she had not allowed the
servant to close, in order that she might listen to every cabriolet
that passed. At length she rang the bell, and was told that it was
eight o'clock.

"Is there no message from Lord Glenmore?" "No, my lady. Shall dinner be
served?" "No--yes--no--yes; bring up something, any thing is enough;"
and away she went to her splendid board in her splendid apartment, with
a train of liveried domestics, to sit down to a lonely dinner with an
aching heart. She hastily dismissed the servants, and then leaning back
on her chair, and suffering the tears that were choking her to flow
over her face--

"I wish we were poor, and he not political," she said, sobbing; "I
should not then be left alone, I should not be absent from him." A
servant entered with a note. She endeavoured to conceal her tears, and,
hastily opening it, read a few kind words from Lord Glenmore, which
spoke his regret at being prevented from meeting her at dinner; and
hoping she would go early to the French play with Lady Tenderden, where
he would join them if possible. The ebb and flow of young feelings
are very quick; and this note was such a cordial, that, as she ran up
stairs, she carolled in the gaiety of her altered feelings: so soon had
she forgot disappointment in anticipated pleasure.

In a few minutes more she was in her carriage on the way to the French
play. When she came into the box, she found it empty, and the play
begun. Lady Tenderden was not arrived; and by the time she had cast a
glance round the house, bowed to some of her acquaintance, and settled
her shawls, &c., she turned all her attention to the stage. It was a
play which had collected a class of audience seldom frequenting that
house; for it was one of those sterling comedies of Molière's, apart
from his too frequent grossness, which, with the true legitimate
intention of comedy, lashed the follies of the age for which it
was written, and was not without its prototype in the present. _Les
Précieuses Ridicules_ is a play that all unsophisticated natures must
enjoy, even those who, as in the case of Lady Glenmore, were not
acquainted with the times and the persons it was written to satirize;
and she herself evinced the pleasure she derived from it, by laughing
naturally and frequently. Her merry laugh called the observation of
several persons, not accustomed to see pain, or pleasure, or amusement,
ever expressed by any outward sign, and who attributed to the
uneducated only such marks of unconstrained nature; but others, again,
(some few), were pleased at any thing so unlike what they generally
beheld; and it conveyed to _them_ a reflected sensation of freshness of
enjoyment, such as they remembered to have felt when life was new, and
before they were schooled by the false fastidious system of the world
of ton, or _blazéd_ to the zest of pleasure.

"What a pity," observed Lord Baskerville, speaking between his teeth,
in his company voice, "that that very pretty Lady Glenmore should make
herself so conspicuous."--He was in the Comtesse Leinsengen's box,
within one of that in which Lady Glenmore was sitting.

"Not at all," replied Mr. Spencer Newcombe; "she only draws attention;
and one cannot look at a prettier woman."

"_Peut-être_," said the Comtesse Leinsengen, "she does it for dat very
purpose, and takes dis new way of being _distingué_."

"Insufferable!" rejoined Lord Baskerville; "if she were as beautiful as
an angel, she would disgust me with those _roturière_ manners."

"I believe," said Mr. Leslie Winyard with a yawn, "that I must really
take compassion on her, and give her some good advice on the subject of
education."

"_L'affaire est faite_," rejoined the comtesse, "if you take her
_en main; mais tout est pour le mieux dans ce meilleur des mondes
possibles_."

Having thus settled the matter in Lady Tilney's box, Mr. Leslie Winyard
proceeded to that of Lady Glenmore, there to commence his destined
essay on education. "I am delighted," he said, "to see you in such good
health, and so intent on immortalizing Molière. If he could only know
what homage you are paying his talents in these expressions of your
mirth, how delighted he would be!"

"Hush," said Lady Glenmore, "I will talk presently; but now I want to
listen to the play--it is so amusing."

"So it is," he replied; "and I am glad to be with any one so natural,
and so much of my own way of thinking. I will, if you allow me, occupy
this place," taking the front seat, "and we will enjoy the thing
together."

"Certainly," said Lady Glenmore, with a pleased expression of
countenance, which, though he knew better than to ascribe its influence
to himself, he was yet gratified to think that others might do so;
and while she continued intent on what was passing on the stage, Mr.
Winyard was busily looking round, _à-la-derobée_, to see what remarks
were passing on his being alone with the new minister's wife. This,
however, was a privilege which he did not long enjoy; for Lord Raynham
and Mr. Spencer Newcombe came in to make their bows and give their meed
of homage. After having courteously received them, Lady Glenmore turned
again to the stage, and they went on talking in an under tone together
at the back of the box.

"I wish," said Lord Raynham, addressing Mr. Spencer Newcombe, "I wish
that we had any dramatist as clever now-a-days to lash our follies."

"Do you think you would like it if you had?" asked his friend.
"Somehow or another, for my own part, I feel I get on just as well
without, and I suspect I am too old to be whipped. Depend upon it,
the reason why we are so well amused with this and some of the other
comedies of Molière is, because we think we are only laughing at
another generation, and another nation, whose _ridicules_ have nothing
in common with our own. No, no; believe me, we English do not like to
be satirized; we can bear it less well than any other nation I know.
Broad farce is our _sauce piquant_; but the exact delineation of our
peculiar vices and follies would not be well received, and indeed I
doubt if legitimate comedy, however well acted or written, would go
down at all."

"My good friend," said Lord Raynham, "this very piece is not so widely
different from the follies of the present day as you may at first sight
imagine."

"Perhaps so," replied his friend; "but one need not put on the cap, you
know; and then nobody can tell whether it fits or not."

Lord Raynham continued (following the thread of his own fancy, rather
than replying to the speaker, as was his wont), "Change the names and
the modes of _Les Précieuses Ridicules_ to those of a certain set
existing now-a-days, and the principle of vanity and folly is much the
same in both; only that, perhaps, on the whole, those of the Hôtel de
Rambouillet were more to women's advantage after all; and had they
not pushed their system too far, it might have lasted longer than the
present dynasty of _ton_ is likely to do. Both are entirely false, both
equally far from the real, nay, genuine charm of true good society.

"However, in all the freaks that vanity and fashion play, there have
been, and ever will be, some redeeming characters, who mix with all the
_fanfaronnade_ of the day, and yet remain uninfected with the epidemic
follies. She, for instance," indicating Lady Glenmore with a look; "can
any thing be more young and fresh, in mind and heart as well as years,
more gay, more natural?"

"Certainly not; and it is quite invigorating to witness her
unsophisticated manners, and the genuine entertainment she derives from
that which she is come professedly to be diverted by; but then the
more's the pity, for it will not last long thus."

"Do not forebode evil," replied Lord Raynham, who was in one of his
best _couleur de rose_ humours; "remember there were, and are, among
the _précieuses ridicules, depuis tout les temps, des Mesdames de
Sevigné et de Connel_, and I forget all their names, who retained
their own innocent individuality, and their natural grace of mind, amid
the most decided affectation and the most ridiculous pretensions."

"Yes, but they were exceptions to general rules; and I do not augur so
well of that one," still meaning Lady Glenmore, "under the care of that
_Alcoviste_," alluding to Mr. Leslie Winyard.

"Is not that Lady Tilney sitting alone in her box?" asked Lord Raynham:
"I must go make my obeisance, as in duty bound, or I may chance to
be discarded; and as we have no Molière to overturn our Hôtel de
Rambouillet[1], we had better keep its door open to us."

[Footnote 1: Vide Molière's Preface to Les Précieuses Ridicules.]

"Agreed," said Mr. Spencer Newcombe; and, bowing to Lady Glenmore,
they departed, leaving Mr. Leslie Winyard tenaciously keeping his
conspicuous place, with cane at lip, and glove in hand, and eyes
that were gathering the observations passed upon him with lynx-like
sharpness, while they seemed half closed in listless or consequential
apathy. In a few minutes after, the curtain dropped.

"Oh!" said Lady Glenmore, "I am so sorry it is over! I do not know when
I have been so amused."

"I, too, am sorry it is over; but _amused_ is not exactly the
explanation I should give of the _cause of my regret_;" and he
endeavoured that his eyes should explain what he _did_ mean.

"No!" said Lady Glenmore with perfect _naiveté_; "then perhaps you have
seen the play often before, and have been looking at the company, not
at the stage?"

"Did you ever play at the game called Magical Music?" asked Mr. Leslie
Winyard; "and if so, and that I were the performer on the instrument, I
should now touch it _forte fortissime_, for you are very near guessing
the truth."

"I do not understand you," said Lady Glenmore, still unconscious of
his drift, and her attention caught by some one who was entering, and
causing a considerable stir. She hoped it was Lord Glenmore, which made
her ask suddenly what o'clock it was. "I am sure," she added, "it must
be very late, and I fear Lady Tenderden is not coming; and Glenmore,
too, said he would come; but I begin to be afraid they _neither_ of
them will;" and her countenance changed, and another spirit than that
of girlish amusement took possession of her, and she became silent,
overcast, and disquieted.

"Were they to come _together_?" asked Mr. Leslie Winyard, insidiously
laying a peculiar emphasis on the last word.

"Oh no!--that is to say, not that I know of. Lady Tenderden did not
tell me so." Mr. Leslie Winyard half smiled, and then, as if checking
himself, he rejoined carelessly, "Oh! you know these diplomatists are
the most slippery fellows imaginable; that is their trade: they are so
taken up with the affairs of the nation, they forget all other affairs.
But it _is_ odd that Lady Tenderden also should have forgotten her
engagement to you."

Lady Glenmore made no reply, but she became more and more uneasy: her
colour went and came "like colours o'er the morning skies." She looked
anxiously around, and started at every step that seemed to pass the
door of her box, but yet, remembering certain lessons she had received,
she contrived to keep under her uneasiness.

"Is there any thing I can do?" said Mr. Leslie Winyard, with an air of
interest and concern. "I am afraid you are not well. Would you like
to go home? I dare say my carriage is at the door, if yours is not
arrived, and that you would do me the honour to accept it."

"Oh no!" she replied; "I am equally obliged to you, but I shall await
the end of the performance."

Mr. Leslie Winyard now thought it was necessary to use all his art,
to draw off her attention from the subject that engrossed it, and, if
possible, fix it on himself.

"I am not apt," he said, "to be often in good-humour with myself; in
truth, I have not much reason; but I am half inclined to suppose there
must be some redeeming clause in my composition, for I have frequently
observed that, after an hour or two of this sort of thing, you grow
restless and weary, and I declare I always feel the same. I plume
myself mightily in having discovered this similarity between us."

"Pardon me, you are quite mistaken. I am often exceedingly well
diverted in public; and when Lord Glenmore is with me," and she
blushed, as if she had said something she ought not, "I am generally
well pleased to stay late, for I am never sleepy."

Mr. Leslie Winyard thought that it was more troublesome to counteract
nature by art, than overcome art itself by art, as he replied,

"Oh! certainly, I understand that; but what I meant to say was, that
it is not these scenes which afford one any real happiness; it is
the society of a few friends, a selection of persons who suit each
other, and who like the same things, and who are occupied in the
same interests. For instance, how very much more enchanting it is to
be singing a duet with you, than sitting at an opera, hearing the
artificial execution of those who sing by profession! for surely the
true intention of music is, that it should express our own feelings,
and transport us into a sort of half-beatific state, such as that
expressed by your '_Sempre più t'amo_.'"

All this sentimental jargon, so different from the real nature of the
speaker, was accompanied by those glances of admiration which spoke a
much plainer language than even his words; but though the innocent Lady
Glenmore was as yet unaware of their tendency, and did not see through
the artificial refinement which Mr. Leslie Winyard thought it worth his
while to assume, in order to induce her to listen to him at all, there
was, nevertheless, a secret sense of genuine purity in her heart, which
made her dislike the license of his gaze; and she answered, fixing
her eyes on him with all the composure of perfect innocence, "It is
very delightful to me to go to the Opera; and the perfect finish of
the singing of professional people teaches me to improve my own. I am
much obliged to you for the compliment; but I assure you, if you only
heard me sing with my master, you would acknowledge that it is quite a
different thing from what it is when I sing with you, for I was always
afraid of putting you out, and that spoiled the little power I have."

This speech certainly did _put him out_, and in his heart Mr. Leslie
Winyard cursed what he called her _niaiserie_; but he determined
that, sooner or later, he would be revenged. Concealing, however, his
mortification, he replied, "You were too good to consider me in any
way; but I am sure nothing that you could do would ever give me a
feeling of displeasure, whatever it might do of regret." He modified
the expression of his eyes as well as that of his words, and entered
with her into a long comparison of the charms of Paris and London in
their respective societies and manners, which engaged her attention;
and she listened with great complacency for some time, during which
he had continued to move his chair nearer and nearer her own, and to
appear to the public to be deeply engaged in the most interesting
conversation, while, at the same time, he succeeded in allaying any
discomfort she might have felt at his own too-marked admiration,
previously shown, by turning her attention into a totally different
channel, and determining to reserve a more open avowal of his
sentiments for a more favourable and distant period, when suddenly the
box door opened. Lady Glenmore started forward with an exclamation of
surprise and pleasure, supposing it to be her husband; but in this she
was mistaken, for Lady Tenderden entered alone.

"I beg your pardon, my _dear ladi_, for being so late," said the
latter; "but you know how impossible it is to get away in any time
from a dinner party"--[the _impossibilities_ of a fine lady are to be
understood with certain modifications and meanings which do not belong
to the literal signification of the word]--"and I regret being detained
on all accounts;" Lady Tenderden went on to say, "first, because I have
lost your society; then, for the sake of de play, which of all things I
wanted to have seen: but you have been amused, I hope?"

"Oh, exceedingly!" replied Lady Glenmore; and then her countenance
was overcast again at her husband's absence, and she sighed heavily,
so that Lady Tenderden hardly knew what to think, and for a moment
began to suppose that she had arrived inopportunely, and disturbed
a _tête-à-tête_; but then, again, remembering the character of Lady
Glenmore, she only turned to Mr. Leslie Winyard, and whispered, in
allusion to a circumstance connected with the _Précieuses Ridicules_,
"I am sure _you_ have been well entertained, although you have
only been studying _la carte du tendre_." Lady Glenmore was too
much absorbed in her disappointment, to pay any attention to their
conversation; and when she roused herself from her reverie, she longed
to ask Lady Tenderden if she knew any thing of the House, and whether
it had broken up or not; but she feared to incur her ridicule. Other
men came into the box to pay their court to Lady Tenderden; and Mr.
Leslie Winyard contrived, in the general move that took place, to
secure the chair immediately behind Lady Glenmore's, and endeavoured to
regain her ear; but her mind was quite abstracted, and herself totally
uninterested in all that was passing; so he leant back in his chair,
and affected to be absent also, that he might appear to others to be
occupied sympathetically with herself.

At length Lady Glenmore could restrain her inquietude no longer; and
turning suddenly round, she said, "I wonder what can detain Lord
Glenmore! he promised to join me here." The different persons looked
at each other and smiled significantly; some in pity, some in derision,
all in contempt.

"Oh you know, my dear," replied Lady Tenderden, "dese conjugal
appointments are _sensé_ to be broken; dey are de pie-crusts of life."
Every body laughed, and poor Lady Glenmore coloured, as she felt a sort
of indignation rise in her heart against the whole scene and the actors
therein.

"But make yourself quite easy," Lady Tenderden added in a sort of
childish voice, "dere is no danger for Lord Glenmore; I will be
answerable for his safety."

Mr. Leslie Winyard affected to feel for Lady Glenmore, and to
disapprove of this joke; and turning to her, he said in his most
_doucereux_ tone, "You may depend upon it, a very long debate has taken
place, and engages Lord Glenmore's absence from hence _necessarily_. It
was always expected that the House would sit very late to-night: what
else could keep him away from _you_?" he whispered, with an expression
that was intended should soothe her; and it did soothe her, and she
felt grateful, and rewarded him by one of her sweetest smiles, saying,

"I conclude you are right." It was not long, however, before Lord
Boileau came into the box.

"Boileau, are you come from the House?" said Mr. Leslie Winyard.

"No," he replied; "the House was adjourned very early on account of the
ex-minister's illness, whose explanation was looked for."

Lady Glenmore heard this circumstance with a beating heart; and looking
reproachfully at Mr. Leslie Winyard, she said, "You see you were
mistaken; why did you deceive me?"

He affected, for a moment, to be overcome with disappointment and
chagrin, and then said in a low voice, "Oh, be not uneasy; there are so
many things may have detained a man in his station. Why do you suffer
yourself to be thus wretched? Would to Heaven he knew! If he did but
know, surely, surely he would be here. But how people mistake their own
happiness! Were I in his place--"

"You would be where he is," said Lady Glenmore with composure.

"Doubtless," rejoined Mr. Leslie Winyard with great presence of mind,
"for we cannot change natures with any one; nor indeed do we ever wish
it." And then he relapsed into silence.

Although Lady Glenmore felt piqued and mortified at her husband's
having broken his promise to her, she could not bear that any one else
should cast the least blame upon him; and she dismissed her chagrin,
and forced herself to talk gaily, as though her heart was light.

Mr. Leslie Winyard, apparently yielding to an irresistible impulse of
admiration, once, and once only, whispered to her, "Admirable creature!
it is only I that see through this disguise, and honour you for the
sacrifice you are making of your feelings, considering the motives by
which you are actuated."

She turned this speech off as a joke; but there was something in it
which, though it pained, yet pleased her. How difficult it is for the
purest natures not to lean to self-approbation when it comes in the
soft breath of praise! Nevertheless, the minutes seemed hours to her
till the curtain dropped, and she arose quickly to depart.

"Where are you going, _ma chère dame_?" said Lady Tenderden.
"Positively you must come with me. I have a _petit soupèr_ on purpose
for you; and as Lord Glenmore knows of old that it is my custom to have
this always after de play, having been prevented from joining us here,
he will not fail to come to my house, and we shall find him waiting for
us."

"Do you really think so?" asked Lady Glenmore hesitatingly.

"Yes, to be sure I do; at all events, you can but come and try; it
will be always time enough to go home afterwards." These persuasions,
adroitly pressed, won upon Lady Glenmore's easy credulity, and
she suffered herself to be handed down stairs, and got into Lady
Tenderden's carriage.

"You look quite divinely to-night," said Lady Tenderden to her as they
drove along--"positively _ravissante; vous ferez fureur, je l'avois
toujours prédit_. Even when you had dat horrible English _modiste_ to
dress you, you were always lovely; but now--now that you have de _vraie
tournure_, and dat _le coupe de vos cheveux_, and de plait of your
petticoat, is _d'après le dernier goût_, depend upon it, all de hearts
will fly to you."

Lady Glenmore laughed outright, it might be a little maliciously; for
she knew that no scissors, however classical in the estimation of her
companion, had touched the luxuriance of her beautiful hair, or any
body but her old English maid fashioned her petticoat; but she enjoyed
the mistake, and only thought, "This it is to be a minister's wife!"

When arrived at Lady Tenderden's house, every thing was prepared for
the reception of the _petit soupèr_, that is to say, about twenty
people of the _élite_; and the rooms were lit only to that precise
degree of brilliancy which is best expressed by a _jour tendre_; but
there was _no Lord Glenmore_.

Some of the gentlemen loitered round the instrument, touching the
notes, and humming some fashionable airs. "Apropos," said Lady
Tenderden, "nobody sings like Lady Glenmore, and Mr. Leslie Winyard
will accompany her in a duet."

"Pardon me," said the latter, "I sing so ill, I should only _put Lady
Glenmore out_," and he looked at her significantly; "besides, joking
apart, I have such a cold, it is impossible I could utter a sound. But
perhaps Lady Glenmore may be prevailed upon to favour us with an air,
which will come doubly recommended when not marred by such an ignoramus
as myself. Here are all sorts of beautiful things lying about;" and
he turned over the music. "Not only all the modern, but all the
half-antiquated compositions. Above all, here is my old admiration; and
it has this advantage over many of its cotemporaries, it has _echappé
belle_, and is not hackneyed, for this cogent reason, that hardly any
body _can_ sing it. I mean Haydn's _Ariana à Naxos_."

"Oh, charming!" echoed one or two _real_ amateurs; "do, Lady Glenmore,
do let us prevail with you to grant us the favour."

"Come," joined Lady Tenderden's voice with the rest, "I am sure you
will not have ended before _Teseo_ will have arrived." Lady Glenmore
_was_ prevailed on to comply; and though she began unwillingly, it
was a composition so much in unison with her actual feelings, that
unconsciously she became identified with its expression; and she
sang with such impassioned tenderness, and looked so much the Ariana
that she sang, that all the men were in unfeigned raptures, and Lady
Tenderden sat biting her lips in despite for having pressed her to
the trial of her skill. Once or twice Lady Glenmore paused when there
was a change in the movement, and half rose, saying, "This is too
long, you will be tired;"--but she permitted a _douce_ violence, and,
reseating herself, finished the whole _scena_. However delightful her
performance, and however delighted her audience might be, the odour of
the delicate viands that now awaited them made a powerful diversion
in favour of the latter; and with _empressement_, while murmurs of
applause were still on the lips of many of her auditors, they hastened
to arrange themselves at the table.

The Comtesse Leinsengen, who was of course of the party, observed to
Lord Baskerville, as he placed himself by her, "I am quite glad to put
de taste of dat horrid dull _Teseo_ out of my mouth. How people can
be so _baroque_ as to choose such long old-fashioned things, good for
nothing but your German professors!"

Lady Tenderden said, "_Avouez, moi milor, qu'une romance ou barcarolle
vaut bien mieux_."

"After all," said Lady Baskerville, "music is a good thing, but supper
is a better." And now came the general clatter of tongues and knives
and forks, sweeter than all the harmony of the spheres.

"I have made a vow," said Mr. Leslie Winyard to Lady Glenmore; "guess
what it is."

"No, tell me; for I never guessed any thing in my life."

"Why, never again to sing with you, even should you deign to ask me,
for I am quite convinced of the truth of your hint, that I only mar the
perfection of your song; and besides, the true way to feel _with you_,
is to see _you feel_, unoccupied by any thought of one's own." Then,
as if he avoided dwelling on the theme of his admiration, he talked
gaily, and glanced at various topics with that agreeable lightness
of manner which scarcely touches what it lights on, and alternately
made her laugh and nearly cry, till her spirits got into that state of
excitement which obscures reason, and leaves the mind in some degree
open to impressions that, at soberer and more reflective times, it
would cast off as not analogous to its healthful state.

It was at a very late hour that this party broke up. Day was breaking,
and with its clear pale light shaming their orgies, before Lady
Glenmore was actually on her way down stairs to depart; but suddenly
the morning was overcast with one of those thunder-storms not unusual
at the season, and torrents of rain burst from the clouds. A heavy
thunder-clap, that made the very houses rattle again, broke over the
spot where she stood: for an instant she paused, appalled, while the
company were rushing up and down past her, and snatching their various
coverings, to shield them as they flew to their carriages.

"You are not afraid?" said Mr. Leslie Winyard, gently pressing the arm
that rested upon his.

"No, not afraid," she answered; but her countenance was very serious,
and something seemed to reproach her for being in such a scene at such
an hour without any natural protector. She moved on, however, to her
carriage: it was the last at the door. "How do you go home?" she said
to Mr. Leslie Winyard.

"Oh! any how," he answered; and he looked around. "I see my people have
thought it wise to avoid the storm, and left me to take care of myself."

"Can I not set you down?" she asked, from an innocent impulse of
good-nature; and again a still louder clap of thunder rebounded over
their heads, and it was with difficulty the coachman held his horses,
as they reared and plunged violently.

"If you will be so very gracious," he answered, stepping in after her;
and at the same time the carriage door was shut, the footman leaped up
behind, and off the horses flew to ---- street.

"I am quite shocked," he said, "to take you out of your way; but really
I think it was not quite safe, with these young horses, to let you
go home alone, and unattended by any protector, in the midst of this
terrific storm."

"Oh! as to that, I am sure Lord Glenmore would never let me have horses
that were not to be depended upon."

"Will that tiresome name," thought Mr. Leslie Winyard, "never be out
of her mouth;" while he replied at the same time, "Doubtless he would
have _that_ care; for who would not be happy to have such a precious
charge as your safety delegated to him?"

"I am very tired," said Lady Glenmore, yawning; "I wonder what made me
stay so late; but I will never do so again."

"I fear, indeed," he answered, "that this, to me, most fortunate moment
will never return, and that I may never again be able to feel that
I am of the least use to you." At length they arrived at Mr. Leslie
Winyard's door. He reiterated his thanks, took his leave, waited at the
threshold till he saw her carriage depart, and Lady Glenmore proceeded
home.

No sooner was Lady Glenmore alone, than she began to reflect on the
unsatisfactory way in which she had passed the night. She felt sorry
that she had been prevailed upon to go to the supper, or, having gone,
that she had staid so long; and, last of all, she regretted having set
Mr. Leslie Winyard down in her carriage. With these excited feverish
feelings, she arrived at her own door.

As soon as she began to undress, she learnt from her maid that Lord
Glenmore had come home early, had waited till one o'clock for her
ladyship, and then gone to bed. "Dear, how provoking!" she said,
tearing off the ornaments she wore; "what could possess me to remain
out so late! How sorry I am!" and all the while she was demurring
in her own mind whether she should tell her husband that she had
set down Mr. Leslie Winyard, or pass the affair over in silence.
"He may be angry; and I meant no harm; and I cannot bear to see him
displeased. Why should I tell him? a thing, in fact, of such common
occurrence, and, in itself, so perfectly innocent." Thus, instead of
going to peaceful rest, did a feverish inquietude take possession of
her mind; for the first step of a married woman from the high road of
unquestioned purity is doing any thing, however trivial in itself,
of which, having done it, she feels she would _rather not_ tell her
husband.




CHAPTER IV.

CROSS PURPOSES.


As Lord Albert ascended to the drawing-room, followed by Mr. George
Foley, whom he had so inopportunely met at Lady Dunmelraise's door,
he felt his heart beat quick within his breast (notwithstanding the
chilling reserve with which a cold indignation steeled it), on the
sudden return of those jealous suspicions which blazed forth afresh
on finding the object of them on the very threshold of Lady Adeline's
presence at the same moment with himself.

Lord Albert was uncertain whether he should see Lady Adeline, or only
be admitted to Lady Dunmelraise. The former, however, had so far
regained an outward composure, that she had determined, should Lord
Albert call, to get over the pain of their first interview, and drink
the very dregs of her mortification at once. "I cannot suffer more,"
she said, "under any circumstances; and in the strength of this anguish
I may be better able to endure, and receive it with becoming dignity,
than at an after-time, when my treacherous heart may again yield to
delusive hopes."

Lady Adeline's mind, however, during the few hours which had elapsed
since Lady Dunmelraise had spoken to her, had profited by her mother's
kind and salutary counsel, and had, besides, found strength, in that
true spirit of resignation which bows to every event, with a perfect
conviction that every thing which concerns us is under the guidance of
a merciful Power who directs all things for our ultimate happiness; and
she acknowledged, with a feeling even of thankfulness, that, painful as
the trial was, it might have been far more painful, under circumstances
which must have rendered it of a deeper and more irremediable nature.
But after all that poor _human_ nature can do, the sense of sorrow for
a time overpowers all others; and when Lady Adeline heard Lord Albert's
well-known step, she would have fled his presence in despite of all her
previous resolves, had she not felt rooted to the spot.

It was a relief, therefore, to her, when he was announced, to see Mr.
Foley enter with him. Lady Dunmelraise was not in the room; and it was
perhaps as well that Adeline had no conscious witness of what was
passing in her breast at the moment, as it enabled her to bear herself
with more apparent ease of manner, than if any person acquainted with
her heart's secret had beheld the meeting. She received Lord Albert's
extended hand, but there was a mutual and chilling coldness in the
touch, too unlike the feeling which usually accompanied the action, for
them not both to be aware of the difference of this from any former
greetings; and each ascribed to the other the cause of this sad change.

Lord Albert was looking pale and harassed, but he was perfectly
calm, and inquired, with that steady voice which a sense of deep
injury conveys at the moment, after Lady Adeline's health, while he
expressed his concern at the indisposition under which she seemed to
have suffered so much the preceding evening. Her reply was short (for
she did not dare to trust herself with any allusion to the cause of
her illness), and she thanked him in as natural a manner as she could
assume; but her lip was blanched and quivered, and a tear was almost
glistening in her eye. To any one who knew what was really passing in
her heart, she would have appeared to have been saying to herself, "Is
it possible this is Albert? my Albert?" But turning the conversation
to some indifferent subject, she addressed herself with a semblance
of vivacity to Mr. Foley; that false vivacity to which the suffering
heart, when taking refuge from the moment's pressure, resorts, in order
to conceal its true feelings. Unfortunately Lord Albert was himself
too much blinded by his own at the time, to see through the specious
disguise she assumed; and with the perversity of jealous love, he put a
false construction on her every word and whole demeanour, and thought
he beheld in both the full confirmation of his suspicions.

Under this false view, Lord Albert turned with visible indignation
away, as if to avoid the pain which Lady Adeline's behaviour inspired;
and he seemed to be intently admiring the pictures which hung on the
walls, and which he knew by heart: but as his eye wandered over them,
in fact, unconsciously, it rested on a portrait of himself,--the same
which, when awaiting Lady Adeline's arrival in London with such lively
impatience, he had then missed from its usual station. How a trifling
circumstance has power to double pain or pleasure, when it comes thus
laden with past and present allusion to the interests of the heart! The
idea at that time of its being her companion was joy to his spirit.
With what very different feelings did he regard it _now_! The whole of
his late hopes seemed to him a mockery, and his heart sickened at the
thought as he again turned from the contemplation and threw himself
into a chair.

There was a soul-searching glance of tender reproach in the look which
he cast upon Lady Adeline. She coloured deeply, and was so intensely
affected, that it was with difficulty she could support herself. Had
there been no witness of their emotion, that moment would have brought
them to a mutual conviction of their true sentiments for each other;
but as it was, Lady Adeline strove to hide her feelings by turning
her countenance away from him, and talking with more earnestness in
a low, quick voice to Mr. Foley. Lord Albert rose, paced the room
hurriedly, and was on the point of rushing away, when at that moment
Lady Dunmelraise entered the apartment. At sight of her Lord Albert
recovered his self-possession. He approached Lady Dunmelraise with
composure, though with rather more of formal dignity in his manner
than he was accustomed to show towards one whom he knew so well, and
whom he had so long considered almost as a mother. There was a similar
restraint on her part; and to his measured expressions of regret on
the subject of Lady Adeline's sudden illness the preceding evening, she
replied coldly and briefly, and then passed on to indifferent subjects,
in which all present took their share. Lord Albert, however, rarely
addressed himself to Lady Adeline or Mr. Foley, but seemed pointedly to
confine his conversation to Lady Dunmelraise; while Lady Adeline, on
her part, fearing to lift her eyes to him, or trust her voice with the
most trivial expression immediately directed to him, continued to talk
to Mr. Foley, though in so unconnected and absent a manner, that could
he have overheard what she said, something like the truth must have
been forced upon his mind.

After remaining a short half hour, which appeared to the parties most
interested like half a century, Lady Dunmelraise, wishing to act on
the principle she had explained to her daughter, of showing no very
marked difference towards Lord Albert, said, "Adeline will not venture
out this evening for fear of a return of her headache. Perhaps, Lord
Albert, if you are not engaged, you will dine and pass a quiet evening
with us?" It is difficult to say how far Lord Albert, whose heart was
ever alive to the slightest kindness, would have rejoiced to accept
this offer, and grasp at the cherished idea that his society was still
wished for, had not Lady Dunmelraise, in the same breath, turned to Mr.
Foley, saying;

"George, will you not be of the party, and dine here too?" There was
a momentary cloud passed over Lord Albert's brow, and Mr. Foley had
accepted the invitation before he could reply. At length, after a
painful pause, Lord Albert said;

"I should be happy, Lady Dunmelraise," and he spoke rather pointedly,
"to avail myself of the wish you have expressed to see me, but your
invitation reminds me that I have neglected to announce an event with
which, perhaps, you are already acquainted, but which I conceive our
intimacy demanded that I should make known to you myself, and which
I came here this day for the express purpose of doing, or I should
not have obtruded myself while I thought Lady Adeline's indisposition
would probably have prevented you from receiving _any one_;" and he
looked reproachfully at her as he said this. Lady Dunmelraise could not
suppress a movement of astonishment. Adeline stopped for want of breath
in her conversation with Mr. Foley, not knowing to what announcement
Lord Albert alluded; and there was but one thought present to her
fancy, one subject superseding all others in her mind; but she
endeavoured to still her extreme agitation by saying to herself, "He
never could have the refinement of cruelty to break off our engagement
so publicly in the presence of an indifferent person." She awaited,
nevertheless, in a state of terror that almost deprived her of a sense
of hearing, what he would next say.

After a considerable pause, or one which seemed such to her, Lord
Albert spoke.

"I do not know whether you care about politics, Lady Dunmelraise?" At
this word, politics, Adeline took courage.

"No," said Lady Dunmelraise, at once relieved and recovered from her
surprise, for she also had thought his preface strangely portentous;
"no, I do not," she said: "they are not a woman's province, except in
as far as regards the interests of those dear to her. But what of them?"

"Why only that changes have taken place, and----."

"Oh yes," interrupted Lady Dunmelraise, as an increasing expression
of sunshine broke over her countenance, "I have heard that various
changes in the cabinet were intended, and that some of my friends were
to be advantaged by the move."

"It is in confirmation of these reports that I came to inform you.
I now myself fill a place in the administration: not that it can be
of any consequence," he added, with some pique, and his lip trembled
as he spoke; "but as you used kindly to express an interest in me in
former times, I have thought it my duty that you should not learn this
circumstance from any other than myself."

"Oh, my dear Lord Albert!" replied Lady Dunmelraise, "I am always happy
to hear of any event which you deem conducive to your happiness: I
hope that this, together with every future step in your life, will be
so likewise; and I very sincerely give you joy of having obtained this
object of your wishes. Adeline," turning to her daughter, "you too must
express your congratulations to Lord Albert." This was almost too much
for Lady Adeline's full heart, but without venturing to look directly
at him, she said;

"Oh, I always do, mamma, wish him happy in every way." Lady Dunmelraise
was aware of her daughter's emotion, and endeavoured to relieve her by
addressing Lord Albert herself.

"These arrangements will not, however, I hope, prevent our seeing you
at dinner to-day: you are not already so involved in the affairs of the
nation as not to be able to spend a few hours with your friends?" Lady
Adeline listened with the impatience of sickening hope for his reply;
in vain trying to soothe herself with the idea, that were he once more
as much in their society as he used to be, he would love them as dearly
as ever.

"I am grieved," he said, in answer to Lady Dunmelraise, "that it is
quite out of my power, for I must be at the House almost immediately: a
lengthened debate is expected on the subject of the late changes, and
it is necessary I should be in my place."

"We are equally sorry with yourself, dear Lord Albert! but we hope
another time to be more fortunate." Another pause ensued. Lady
Adeline's spirits again sank, but she continued her painful effort
to rally, by talking more than ever to Mr. Foley; and Lord Albert,
fancying that his presence was as irksome to her, as remaining longer
was painful to himself, immediately took his leave, and left the house
mortified, miserable, and out of humour with himself and the whole
world. He had really stated the fact, in pleading public business as
the cause of his declining Lady Dunmelraise's invitation; and he
had hardly time to reach the House before the commencement of the
debate. On arriving there, and soon after he had taken his seat, it
was announced that the member was seriously indisposed who had been
expected to give one of those explanations which (such is the low ebb
of character among British statesmen of the present day) every one who
has held part in the government of the country has latterly thought it
necessary to make in vindication of his public conduct. The question
was consequently put off; and the House, after some business of little
importance, and moving for new writs for those members who had accepted
situations under government, adjourned at an early hour.

Lord Albert found himself thus relieved from the tie which had
prevented his accepting Lady Dunmelraise's invitation; but it was
no longer a question with him, as it would have been under other
circumstances, of returning to South Audley-street, and stating what
had occurred to set him at liberty, and requesting to avail himself of
the opportunity to receive the pleasure of dining there. This would
have been the act of a healthful mind, but under the mental disease
which now tormented him, he turned with scorn from the idea; for he
saw every thing in a distorted point of view, and ascribed to Lady
Dunmelraise and her daughter the unworthy design of intending to
provoke him to a relinquishment of his engagement with the latter,
either because they did not choose to break with him themselves, or
because they were not, perhaps, yet sure of Mr. Foley's intentions.
Nothing but jealousy could have raised such a suspicion, so unworthy
of them and of himself, respecting persons so long known, so much and
justly esteemed, so clearly loved: but what chimera is too monstrous
not to be born of that fiend which had taken possession of him? Under
this species of aberration, for it can be called by no milder name, he
threw himself on his horse, rode off, careless whither he went, and
found himself in the park.

All the _élite_ of _ton_ were congregated around Kensington Gardens,
and amongst the carriages waiting, he observed Lady Hamlet Vernon's.
In the turbulence of his emotions, and in the press of business during
the morning, he now recollected that he had forgotten to tell her of
his official situation, although he felt that from her at least he
would meet with a sincere and lively participation in the satisfaction
he experienced at the success of his opening career in the political
world. But his heart was not satisfied; and, suffering under his fatal
delusion, he needed the balm of kindness, and turned to her for its
bestowal. Giving his horse, therefore, to his servant, he went into the
Gardens with the intention of finding her. They met as she was on the
point of leaving the party she was walking with, and returning to her
carriage. He accosted her with a sort of interest in his manner which
could not fail of being agreeable to her, and they continued walking
and conversing earnestly on the subject which he briefly communicated
to her.

So earnestly, indeed, did they discuss the matter, that they found
themselves at length almost the only persons in the Gardens, and were
reminded only, by this circumstance, of the lateness of the hour. Lady
Hamlet Vernon, astonished, looked at her watch, and finding it past
seven o'clock, said she must hasten home, as she had invited persons
to dine with her, and pressed Lord Albert to join the party. This he
promised to do; and he felt a kind of false pleasure in thinking he
should, at least, be in the society of those who really valued him; for
there was a sting of pique and mortification at his heart, which Lady
Hamlet Vernon's conversation had not diminished, and which made him
gladly seek refuge out of himself for consolation. After the dinner,
the party broke up to go to Almack's, and Lord Albert D'Esterre,
_desœuvré_ and dissatisfied, was easily persuaded to accompany
Lady Hamlet Vernon. On entering the room, the first person whom he
recognised was Lady Delamere and her daughters. He bowed to them, and
he thought they returned his bow coldly. This circumstance did not
escape the observation of Lady Hamlet Vernon, and she talked of the
Delameres in a way which, though quite untrue, Lord Albert was at the
moment too much in a temper to listen to.

"I often wonder," she said, "if all the uninteresting persons were
ejected from society, how few would be left. But I believe, if this
were the case, the evil would only assume another shape; for an
assembly like this, if all were perfect, would be the dullest thing in
the world: it is the mixture which affords us amusement."

"Besides," rejoined Lord Albert, "_le monde est plein de fous, et qui
n'en veut pas voir doit demeurer tout seul, et cassèr son miroir_."

Lady Hamlet Vernon did not quite like the possible application of the
adage; but she endeavoured to turn the spleen which she saw was the
feeling of the moment with him into the channel best adapted to her
views. "It is not fools," she continued, "that I find so much fault
with, as dull and insipid people. There is Lady Delamere, again,
for instance, who is one of your good mammas walking about with her
chickens, all so measured and so _mime_, that one is sure a happy
erratum could never occur in their life or conversation. There is no
hope that they will ever change, for they are 'content to dwell in
decencies for ever.' Their very loves and hatreds are measured out by
the square rule of fit and proper; and if the friend they liked best
made any deviation from what they deemed the proper course, they would
discard such an one from their favour. This I hold to be cold-hearted
and selfish policy, sheltering itself under the mask of virtue; for
the fact is, that half that class of people build their power upon a
pretence to superiority in moral excellence, not for its own sake, I am
certain, but for the sake of obtaining the favour of general opinion,
which their slender means of _agréments_ (they have sense enough to
know) would never give them."

"Do you mean, then, to say, that all superiority of purity in conduct
or character springs from such false and ignoble sources? That, dear
Lady Hamlet, you know is impossible; for the same fountain cannot
send forth sweet waters and bitter." Lady Hamlet Vernon felt that Lord
Albert was not in a mood to pass lightly over any thing that was said
on serious subjects, and quickly corrected herself, adding;

"Far be it from me to think that there are not _some_ natures genuinely
pure and noble. _Mais ne vous en déplaise._ I cannot endow that _bonne
pâte de femme_ with such brilliant investment. Lady Delamere, my dear
Lord D'Esterre, is, as you must know, the dullest, heaviest person I
ever conversed with; and allow me to tell you she can give herself
sufficient airs of consequence. Nevertheless, I have known several
instances in which she scrupled not to sacrifice persons that it suited
her to put down. _Au reste_, I make no doubt she has all those good
qualities which quizzes always teem with."

"Really," said Lord D'Esterre, "you astonish me! I thought at least she
had been good-natured."

"Your own good-nature does not allow you to see these things; you have
been used, you know, to consider all that party perfect; but"--Lord
Albert sighed deeply--"but you will find," continued Lady Hamlet
Vernon, fully aware of the meaning of that emotion which had escaped
him, and wishing to abstract his mind from the cause, by adverting
to mere general topics, "you will find that the world is made up of
classes. There are the Duchess D'Hermanton, Lady Borrowdaile, Lady
Aveling, form one class; Lady Melcombe and her people form another;
your friends the Misses D. another; and we, you know, form a class
totally apart." Lord Albert listened to this kind of conversation
sometimes with attention, sometimes abstractedly. His mind frequently
adverted to totally different subjects; but still he sat by Lady Hamlet
Vernon's side the whole evening, or walked with her about the rooms.

In doing this, he was not aware of the occasion he gave for remark;
still less did he know that Lady Delamere had observed him in Lady
Hamlet Vernon's box the preceding evening, and that that very
circumstance had caused Lady Adeline's illness; for if he had guessed
this truth, different indeed would have been the result of his
morning's interview with her. His appearance again, on the present
evening, with Lady Hamlet Vernon, very naturally occasioned Lady
Delamere's altered manner; but he saw in her behaviour only the
confirmation of an intention, on the part of Lady Dunmelraise and
her daughter, and of the whole family, to break with him altogether.
Neither did it occur to him, so prepossessed was he with the idea
that Adeline was happier in Mr. Foley's society than in his own, that
his excuse for not dining with Lady Dunmelraise must now appear to
have been false, and framed expressly for the purpose of fulfilling
another engagement. How very different would have been his feelings,
could he have known the anguish he inflicted on her who still loved
him so truly; and the additional wounds she would receive, when the
circumstance of his seeming devotion to Lady Hamlet Vernon, during
the whole of that evening, with the aggravation attending it of his
supposed duplicity, should become known to her!

The fact was, although he was perfectly unconscious of it, that Lord
Albert's attentions to Lady Hamlet Vernon began to be considered in the
light of a _liaison_ by the world; yet notwithstanding he was deemed
too wise to risk matrimony, yet that was the last thing cared for. In
society, arrangements which included _one_ now generally included the
other. The young men rejoiced in Lord Albert's being brought to their
own level, as they thought; and all who had any thing to hide in their
own conduct felt less afraid of his superiority, when they saw him on
the verge of an intrigue of the same nature as many of their own.

When, at length, Lord Albert D'Esterre returned home, the hum of
voices, and the unmeaning admixture of dancing tunes, mingled together
in utter discordance, still sounded in his ears, and he felt provoked
at himself for having wasted many hours so unsatisfactorily. The
tension of the mind, under the action of such feelings as those which
agitated his breast, is never really relieved in similar scenes or by
similar means; and the false, feverish excitement produced by them,
when it passes off, leaves the sufferer a thousand times more low and
debilitated than before he had recourse to them. Lord Albert turned
every way but the right way to find peace; and when sleep did visit
him, it was not the balmy friend which comes to the pillow of an
approving conscience.




CHAPTER V.

THE PRESENTATION AT COURT.


The day at length arrived, to which so many had looked forward with
lingering expectation, and which, to the young in general, was one
of delightful anticipation. Among these, however, there was one who,
though both young and beauteous, and likely, under other circumstances,
to have enjoyed the idea of coming out into the dazzling scene of the
world, remained unmoved by the general festivity, from a dread of the
trial which the scene would probably bring to her feelings.

Lady Delamere had communicated to Lady Dunmelraise the circumstance
of her having seen Lord Albert D'Esterre the preceding evening at
Almack's, and of his being engrossed the whole time with Lady Hamlet
Vernon;--intelligence naturally productive of the most painful
conclusions, and which, of course, received considerable aggravation
in Lady Dunmelraise's mind from the excuses made by Lord Albert for
not dining in South Audley-street on that day. She however felt
that, although most painful, it was right to inform Adeline of this
fresh instance of Lord Albert's unfeeling conduct, in order that she
might, by so doing, lead her more and more to wean her affections from
a person so unworthy as he now appeared to be, and help to destroy
the remaining hopes which her daughter might otherwise retain of his
returning affection.

Lady Adeline might well have thought that she had been prepared for the
worst, and imagined that her cup of sorrow was filled to the brim; but
at this additional circumstance she felt, that the human heart is never
so full of bitterness, but that there may be added some drops of gall.
Her usual serenity, however, did not wholly forsake her; but her first
impulse was to entreat her mother to spare her the trial of attending
the drawing-room.

"I wish," she said, "to be suffered to gain strength in retirement,
and to seek for resignation, where you, my dearest mamma, have ever
taught me it can alone be found. Some day or other," though she did not
believe what she was saying, "some day or other, I dare say, I shall be
quite happy again; only _now_"----But at that moment the _quite happy_
were words too much in contrast to the _quite wretched_ at her heart,
for her lips to be able to pronounce, and in a passion of tears her
feelings found relief.

Lady Dunmelraise suffered them to flow unimpeded, and when she regained
composure, said, "My dearest child, I insist on nothing to which you
think yourself unable; but if you _can_ make the exertion, do so, for
my sake and your own. Reflect on the humbled feelings of your mother
and of yourself, if Lord Albert should ever know into what a depth of
sorrow and humiliation he has plunged us both."

"Mamma, mamma, he must know that; for does he not know, has he not
seen, have I not shown him a thousand times how very dear he is to
me? and, after all, what should I be, if I were not humiliated by his
desertion?"

"Most true, dearest, in heart; but there is a prudence and decorum to
be preserved in outward seeming; a respect due to ourselves, in not
displaying our feelings to the unfeeling world, who only trample upon
them with unheeding carelessness, and can never appreciate their depth
or value. I can well understand, my dear child, that you will be making
an heroic effort, by going into public under the present suffering
state of your heart; but I do ask of you to make that effort; for
I know, by experience, that there is much _real_ power gained over
ourselves by assuming its _appearance_."

This conversation ended by Lady Adeline's promising to do every thing
her mother wished for her dear sake, whom she loved with more than
filial affection; and, having once given this promise, she determined
to fulfil it nobly. The satisfaction which follows any sacrifice of
selfish feelings to the wishes of those whom it is our duty to please
is never-failing, and, under every circumstance, affords a peace
which can never be obtained by their indulgence to the dereliction of
principle.

But, notwithstanding all Lady Adeline's amiable qualities, and all the
estimable motives of her conduct, she could not avoid the natural pangs
of sorrow and anxiety, which she, in common with every human being, is
doomed to experience. Come they must in some shape or other to all;
happiest are those who entertain them wisely. The whole of that day, an
ebb and flow of dread and doubt passed over her in alternate tides of
hope or despondence;--of doubt, if Lord Albert would again call,--of
dread, lest, if he did call, she should betray herself to him; yet of
hope, that he might put this trial to the test,--and of despondence,
as the hours passed away and no Lord Albert appeared.

Fortunately, before we are tired of sorrow, sorrow tires us, so that
wearied nature finds refuge in sleep despite of itself; and this was
the case of Lady Adeline, whose eyes, while yet full of tears, were
closed in slumber: but it is the wakening again which is the trial;
then we seem to have derived fresh power to suffer, and the sad vision
of grief is presented to us with renewed vitality. Such were Lady
Adeline's feelings when her maid brought to her bedside the attire and
the ornaments with which she was that day to be adorned, in order to
enter upon a scene of pleasure which to most young hearts is attended
with so many fascinations.

"Take them all away, Mourtray," she said, "take them all away; it is
not time to dress yet." And when the time did come, how many painful
recollections marred every thought of pleasure! Should she see Lord
Albert in the crowd? was the first question she asked herself; and if
she did see him, how would he behave to her? how should she behave to
him? If he were unoccupied by any one at the moment, and apparently
disengaged from any interesting conversation, she thought she could
go through the scene; but if he were talking to one whose name was
now too well known to her, and too closely allied with the cause of
her misery, she feared that neither the time nor the place would be
sufficient restraints to sustain her under the trial.

"Every body," she said, looking at herself in the glass, "every body
must read my story in my face. These red, red eyes, these swollen
lips!"--And then she started up from her seat and cried, "No, no, it
must not be thus! it is for my dearest mamma's sake I am going, and
for her sake I will master my emotion, I will endeavour to assume
the tranquillity which she recommends." Repeated immersion of her
face in cold water, and the being told that a short half hour only
remained to the time appointed by Lady Delamere for her to be at her
house, restored, in some degree, the beauty of her complexion and the
animation of her eyes; while the bustle of necessary haste imparted
that glow to her cheeks, which, though called forth by feverish and
fervid feelings, could still boast of being the delicate dye of the
rose. Her dress was in itself of the simplest and most unadorned
fashion; and when her jewels were presented to her by her attendant,
most of which had been gifts from Lord Albert, she laid them all aside,
and positively declined wearing any. The extreme luxuriance of her
light, crisped hair, braided and curled in many a graceful fold, was
her only decoration; except that, as she passed a myrtle (the gift of
Lord Albert also), she hastily plucked a branch of it, and placed it
with some care in her bosom. How deceitful is the human heart! and,
above all, how deceitful is the passion of love, which conceals itself
under a thousand disguises! The jewels were discarded, but the flower
was chosen; that flower, which, for its emblematic associations, was
ten times dearer to her, and spoke a softer language than the diamonds'
blaze or the rubies' dye. Thus while denying, she cherished, love! Oh,
woman, woman! you alone know the meaning of the word, its thousand
concealed tendernesses, its purity of essence, its endless springs of
increase!

Lady Dunmelraise, when she took leave of her daughter, pressed her to
her heart, and as she blessed her with an honest pride, thought there
could not be a fairer, purer being, among the glittering throng. "Be of
good cheer," she said, "love, and sustain your own dignity."

When Lady Adeline arrived at her aunt's house, she had to undergo the
gaze of the persons assembled to look at the dresses of those who were
going to court, whose remarks, as she passed, kept alive that flutter
of spirits which prevented her from indulging in softer feelings, and
on the present occasion was of infinite use to her. On beholding her
dress, her cousins exclaimed against the total absence of ornament or
jewels; but she said, it was of no consequence, nobody would look at
her; and when they all offered her various _aigrettes_ and necklaces,
she besought them not to insist on her wearing them.

"I have plenty at home," she said; but added, with a melancholy smile,
"I have made a vow to wear none." Lady Delamere understood her, and
thought her own loveliness stood her in good stead of any extraneous
aid. At all events, she conceived it was cruel to press her further;
and as time admitted of no delay, they went to their carriage through
a line of persons drawn up on each side, all of whom bore testimony to
Lady Adeline's beauty. They went slowly along in the splendid equipage,
which, in the magnificence of old family state, attracted unusual
attention; till, coming to St. James's-street, they were obliged,
by the string of carriages, to continue moving on at a foot's pace.
And here again the gaping crowd made no inapt observations as the
glittering throng passed in array before them.

One singular-looking, fat man actually followed the carriage a
considerable way, evidently in admiration of Lady Adeline; and observed
to the person near him, loudly enough for her to hear what he said,
"As for _she_, so plain-dressed like, she's the biggest beauty of 'em
all," pointing at her; "but she wears all her diamonds and pearls in
her eyes and mouth." The people around roared and laughed, apparently
in approbation, and even Adeline smiled and blushed. By the time they
arrived at the entry of Buckingham House, her cheeks were glowing, and
her eyes sparkling, with an excitement which was, she acknowledged to
herself, salutary at the time, though factitious and evanescent. The
brilliancy of the scene too, so new to her, was not without its effect.
The rich liveries of the attendants, the military, the truly British
grandeur of the yeomen of the guard, the blaze of beauty, of dress, and
of smiles, struck Adeline with admiration and momentary pleasure; and
in her own natural way, she said to one of her cousins,

"This is a noble sight. I am glad I came. Mamma is always in the
right." But then in another moment she sighed; and remembering all
the circumstances that had so recently passed, the whole moving mass
of feathers, flowers, and jewels, became one undistinguishable
confusion, without power to charm or awaken her interest. But all
this while, she was borne along on the stream of the crowd; and she
heard, amid the buzz of voices, her own name, and then the observation
which followed it. Women always talk of the dress of those they wish
to _denigré_, and of course Adeline's was commented upon, and found
great fault with. "Quite improper, I declare!" said old Lady Honeyman
to her distorted daughters, whose features, under the influence of the
dancing St. Vitus, seemed to redouble their activity in honour of the
shaking brilliants with which they were covered; "I declare it is quite
improper to come to court as if one was in one's chemise! perfectly
shocking! quite indecent! Poor thing! had she nobody belonging to her
who could lend her a pair of earrings, at least?"--"What a beautiful
creature!" cried another voice; (a man's, of course) "did you ever see
any thing like the harmony of her features and the shape of her ear? it
is quite classical; and she has none of those horrid girandoles pendent
to it to spoil its form."

"Who is she?" "who is she?" went round and round in audible whispers;
and the last speaker pressed onwards, somewhat careless of the
convenience of his neighbours, on purpose to get another view of her.

"How people do squeeze!" said the enraged Lady Honeyman; "it is like
a bear-garden. Elfrida, my love, take care of your diamond cestus:
Lauretta, do not lose your ruby _aigrette_.--There, sir, there!--you
have torn my Brussels lace lappet all to pieces with the hilt of your
sword!"--And at this appeal the gentleman looked down on the little
yellow dwarf with infinite dismay and many apologies; and stopping to
disengage his sword from the ill-fated lappet, cast an evil eye upon
the black Lauretta, who assisted to disengage the lappet, wishing her
in the shrine of her namesake, where all her diamonds might receive
that homage which he was only endeavouring to pay to the unadorned
Adeline's genuine beauty.

At length Lady Adeline and her party reached the room in which the
sovereign stood; and Lady Adeline found herself suddenly in an open
space, from whence the monarch, and those persons attached to his
household, could distinctly see every person separately who entered.
Lady Adeline felt awed, for she had imbibed a respectful attachment
to the person of her sovereign, and her young feelings were those of
enthusiastic loyalty.

Lord Albert, who in his official situation had the private _entré_,
had not yet seen Lady Adeline, and at the moment she appeared in the
door-way, was talking to Prince Luttermanne; when the latter, with his
habitual admiration for every thing young and new, was so struck with
her appearance, that he broke off his conversation, saying, "Who is
that very extraordinarily beautiful girl now entering?" Lord Albert,
whose back was towards her, turned suddenly round, and, on beholding
her, was so overcome by a sudden revulsion of feeling, that he could
not directly reply. He hesitated, his countenance changed, his lip
quivered; and, after a considerable pause, he abruptly said, "Oh!
that is Adeline." Prince Luttermanne looked astonished, saying at the
same time, "Who the deuce is Adeline?" but Lord Albert had not waited
to answer any further inquiries. He moved away round the back of the
circle, to get a more distinct view of the object so unexpectedly
presented to him;--an object still dearer to his heart than any other
upon earth, and one whose presence, when, as thus, suddenly brought
before him, was never-failing in overturning all the sophistry of art,
and all the juggles and distortion of jealous passion. In the present
instance she stood before him as the personification of innocence and
truth.

In the midst of splendour and of beauty, _her_ beauty shone forth
in its unadorned power, and in the freshness of its morning purity,
pre-eminently bright in perfect simplicity. She was not unconscious of
the admiration she excited; but that very consciousness added to her
charms: it deepened the roseate colour of her cheek, gave additional
lustre to the tremulous sparkle of her eye, and threw over her whole
air and person that veil of diffidence which imparts grace to every
movement and interest to every glance. Lord Albert gazed on her with
intense admiration. He thought of the time when he had looked forward
to the present epoch in Lady Adeline's existence, as to one in which he
should be a partaker in her triumph, and gather up the suffrages paid
to her beauty as though they were so many offerings bestowed to gratify
his own feelings and confirm the superiority of his own choice;--but,
as it was, how differently did he feel!

She was now nothing to him, he was nothing to her; she cared not for
his approbation or his censure; she knew not whether he was to be
present at this her first _debut_ in the world, or not: and then,
again, a change came over his fluctuating feelings, and recalling to
mind the thousand instances in which she had proved her attachment to
him, the truth for a moment flashed before his fancy, and in despite
of all that had lately occurred, he believed himself dear to her. How
an enamoured imagination catches at trifles, and is the sport of hope
or fear! Lord Albert for a moment felt the full glow of tenderness and
trust float over his whole being, like a refreshing dew over a thirsty
land; and as he moved along, unheeding the gay crowd that flitted past
him, he sought only for the one object whom he desired to behold. He
now caught a glimpse of her, and then lost it again, obscured by some
feathered headdress, or some uninteresting intervening object; but, at
length, he reached a spot from whence he had a full view of her, as she
half knelt to kiss the sovereign's hand, and was raised again by the
most graceful action; and Lord Albert had the gratification of thinking
he saw an expression of gracious admiration in the sovereign, as he
turned to one of the lords in waiting, evidently making some remark on
Lady Adeline.

But all this while Lord Albert failed in catching her eye; and he now
retraced his steps as hastily as the crowd would allow, in order to
reach the door by which Lady Adeline must necessarily go out. In this
attempt, however, he was disappointed, for such was the pressure and
hurry of the officers to prevent a crowd in the presence-chamber,
and Lady Adeline was so rapidly hurried on, that she was quickly lost
to Lord Albert's view by the intervening multitude. He had not even
the gratification of once catching her eye as she passed; for, added
to the celerity with which she was compelled to move on after her
presentation, she felt, as was natural to one so young, a degree of
mingled flurry and awe, which kept her eyes fixed on the ground.

This, however, did not suggest itself to Lord Albert, and he questioned
himself to ascertain whether her apparent unconsciousness of his
presence was real or feigned. Notwithstanding this doubt, Lord Albert
continued his pursuit of her, and was so long unsuccessful, that he
began to think she must have left the Court. As he made his way with
difficulty through the crowd, he heard her name frequently mentioned,
and always accompanied with praises of her beauty. As expressions of
this kind fell on his ear, he could not forbear feeling that it was
profanation for any one to dare to speak of Lady Adeline but himself:
so unjust and so monopolizing is the spirit of jealous love.

At length, Lord Albert, almost despairing of meeting with Lady Adeline
by moving about, determined to fix himself at the outward door of
the saloon, where he knew that she must pass in going away. Here he
resolved to await the departure of the whole crowd, and, at least,
ascertain the fact; but he had only taken this position a very short
time, when Lady Hamlet Vernon appeared on the stairs, and nodding to
Lord Albert as she descended into the great hall, approached, and
took the seat which of course he relinquished to her. However much
he had, of late, sought her society, and felt entangled by the spell
which she knew so well to cast over him, there existed, at the present
moment, a disposition to emancipate himself from the thraldom, and he
felt her presence to be an intrusion. In proportion as these feelings
increased, so did the restraint in his manner and conversation become
more evident; and Lady Hamlet Vernon was much too penetrating, not to
be aware that some strong interest directed his attention from her.

He had remained some time in this embarrassed situation, which a
mutual consciousness rendered every moment more painful. Answering
Lady Hamlet Vernon's questions mechanically with his lips, while his
thoughts and eyes were wandering in quest of the only object he wished
to see, he suddenly beheld Lady Adeline, with Lady Delamere and her
cousins, at the bottom of the staircase, and was on the point of
abruptly leaving Lady Hamlet Vernon's side, and darting towards her,
when Lady Adeline's eyes were for a moment directed to him. A mutual
glance was interchanged, as brief as it was powerful, and he felt that
at least she had seen, had recognized him, and in that single glance
their souls had met and felt together; but her eyes quickly dropped,
she spoke hastily to Lady Delamere, and they mutually turned, as if to
re-ascend the staircase. This movement, however, although its intention
was evident, was so in contradiction with Lady Adeline's glance of
recognition, that it did not deter Lord Albert from ardently wishing to
speak to Lady Adeline; and he was hastening away, in despite of Lady
Hamlet Vernon's endeavours to arrest his attention, to join the former,
when a cry of "Throw open the window! water! she faints!" struck his
ear. The sound came from the opposite quarter in which he was going;
but when he perceived the bustle, and the crowd endeavouring to make
way for some person who was ill, and whom they were trying to bring
into a freer current of air, his first impulse was to stand aside
also, and lend his assistance for that purpose. In doing this, he soon
recognised the lady who had fainted to be Lady Glenmore, borne in the
arms of Mr. Leslie Winyard; and then, with renewed interest, as the
wife of his friend Lord Glenmore, he pressed forward, and succeeded
in making a passage to the window, the sash of which he threw up, and
partly aided in placing Lady Glenmore on a seat: he then hastened away
for water and restoratives.

Every one was forward in tendering assistance to the minister's wife;
and whilst many officiously stood around her, others, of better
judgment and kinder intentions, went in search of Lord Glenmore.

"What a lucky fellow!" cried Lord Boileau, one of the idlers who was
standing near; "what a lucky fellow that Leslie Winyard is, to have the
carrying of that beautiful creature in his arms!"

"Oh! you know _c'est une affaire arrangé_," said Lord Gascoigne. "She
never speaks to any one else now."

Lord Albert heard these remarks with indignation as he returned with
water, and could not help casting a look at the speakers, that they
well understood.

"Upon my word," observed Lord Boileau, "that man is quite insufferable.
I thought he was improved since he lived amongst us; but I suppose he
looks forward to rival Leslie Winyard, and will not hear the lady's
fame called in question on account of any one but himself."

"Bah!" replied Lord Gascoigne; "Lady Hamlet Vernon will never suffer
that."

"Is that really as people say?" asked Lord Boileau.

"Oh! quite settled long ago," answered Lord Gascoigne; "and as she is a
_maitresse femme_, she will not allow him to forsake her quietly."

"How very beautiful, how very lovely she is, Boileau!" said Lord
Baskerville, approaching at that moment; "now that she can neither talk
nor laugh, she is quite charming--hem! I never knew before that she was
handsome--hem! She ought to do nothing but faint--hem!"

"Yes," they both replied, "she is very lovely indeed." "I rather envy
Leslie Winyard," cried Lord Boileau: "that fellow has always been
lucky. But have you seen Lady Adeline Seymour, _la nouveauté du jour_?
Rather raw and unfledged yet, but she will be a very fine creature a
year or two hence."

"Don't you know her story?" whispered Lord Baskerville, approaching his
mouth to the ear of Lord Boileau.

"No--yes--I did hear something of it. She is going to be married, isn't
she?"

"She _was_," rejoined Lord Baskerville, looking very wise; "but, a-hem!
that's all off now. I know all about it--hem! for _he_ is so involved,
hem! that marriage is impossible--hem! And really the poor girl has
_echappé belle_; for I never knew such a puritanical affected--hem!
I cannot conceive what the women see about him to endure him for a
moment--hem!"

By this time the report of Lady Glenmore's having fainted spread
through the rooms, and there were assembled around her Lady Tilney,
Lady Ellersby, and the Comtesse Leinsengen.

"I do not wonder you were overcome, my dear Lady Glenmore; it was
terribly hot," said Lady Tilney in her most coaxing manner. "These
vile drawing-rooms are quite enough to kill one. Such a heat, and such
a crowd of Heaven knows whom! And then to see whom, or what? for one
never sees the ostensible object for whom one comes here. If it were
not to oblige Lord Tilney, and because one must, I would never come to
such a horrid place again. My dear Lady Glenmore, you who have suffered
so much are, I am sure, out of all patience with the whole thing."

Lady Glenmore, who had by this time quite recovered, and who was placed
very comfortably enjoying the fresh breeze that came to her unpolluted
by the heat and breath of the crowd, as she sat close by the window,
now resumed her accustomed smiling cheerfulness, and replied,

"Not at all, Lady Tilney; I assure you I have been much amused,
and think it is a very splendid scene;--so much beauty, so much
magnificence, that I was quite provoked at myself for being overcome,
and unable to enjoy it; but I am perfectly well again _now_, and I hope
another time to be more used to it."

"_Quelle niaiserie!_" whispered the Comtesse Leinsengen to Lord
Baskerville. "She ought to go back to her nursery."

"Nothing is so tiresome," replied Lord Baskerville, "as low people who
are always diverted. They must be false or fools, a-hem! after their
first existence in the world--hem! _our_ world I mean--hem! As to me,
I don't care for any thing or any body, and am always bored to death
here, a-hem! ar'n't you?"

"_C'est selon_," answered the comtesse in her most abrupt manner.

"Don't you know," cried Lady De Chere, "that there are a certain number
of people who live upon getting up scenes all their life? they are
always either fainting, or crying, or haranguing."

"It's very bad taste," rejoined Lord Baskerville, "at all events--hem!"
At this moment Lord Glenmore came up to his wife, betraying
considerable agitation, and inquiring tenderly of Lady Glenmore how
she felt, and speaking to her in a low voice of earnest solicitude; to
which she replied with answering affection.--Mr. Leslie Winyard moved
away, affecting more displeasure than he really felt.

"What a fuss Glenmore is in! Vulgar!--hem! I cannot conceive," said
Lord Baskerville, "why people should display their conjugal felicities
to the world."

"The old song, I think," observed Lord Raynham, who was passing by, and
overheard the remark, "gives good advice:--

    'Ne cherchez pas la quintessence;
     Contentez-vous de l'apparence.
     Qui veut trop voir, et trop savoir,
     Trouve souvent plus qu'il ne pense.'

"A polite inquiry, that did not enter into particulars, might perhaps
have suited better the interest of all parties, than that apparently
minute inspection of circumstances--eh! Baskerville?" with a sort of
sneering smile--"don't you agree with me?"

"Certainly, hem! nothing is so mistaken, or argues such want of
knowledge of the world, as to be _affairé_ about any thing."

"_To be_," observed the Comtesse Leinsengen, "is one ting, to _seem_ to
be is anoder: in dat lies de _savoir vivre_ or de no _savoir_. But did
I not hear my carriage was up?"

"Yes, comtesse; allow me to have the honour;" and she accepted his
offered arm and departed.

"D'Esterre," said Lord Glenmore, "I leave you to take care of Lady
Glenmore, whilst I go in quest of our carriage; your gallantry will, I
am sure, accept the charge."

Lord Albert felt really flattered, and would at any other time have
been happy to have such a post assigned to him, had it not been that
he feared in consequence to lose seeing Lady Adeline. This thought
gave his countenance an anxious, serious air, which the men around
did not fail to comment upon. But Mr. Leslie Winyard could scarcely
conceal his ill-humour. The husband to cross him was bad enough, but
another man, and that man Lord Albert D'Esterre, whom of all others
he most disliked, was gall and bitterness to him. He approached Lady
Glenmore, however, casting a look of insolence towards Lord Albert;
but the serious, preoccupied demeanour of the latter prevented his even
observing the impertinence intended for him.

Mr. Leslie Winyard now bent over Lady Glenmore, and whispered in her
ear. She listened with rather more complacency than Lord Albert seemed
to think was fitting, and she thanked Mr. Leslie Winyard for his care
with somewhat more of feeling than he thought the occasion merited; but
she spoke aloud, and seemed to avoid the whispered conversation which
the other affected to hold.

Lord Albert, however, who was the last man in the world to play the
mean part of a spy over the actions of any one, felt his situation
sufficiently awkward; and considering that his every wish was on the
wing after Lady Adeline, it became every instant more painful. He
almost determined on leaving Lady Glenmore; but then he thought Lord
Glenmore would naturally feel hurt at his doing so. Whilst weighing
this matter with himself, Lord Glenmore returned, announcing the
carriage to be at hand.

"D'Esterre, have the goodness to give your arm to Lady Glenmore on one
side, and I will take care of her on the other, and then we shall be
able, Georgina, to take you through the crowd without your suffering
any inconvenience." Mr. Leslie Winyard bit his lip with mortification,
and Lord Boileau said to him, with some degree of sarcasm,

"Really, Winyard, I think you _are_ ill used; after your services, to
see another preferred before you."

"Oh! _c'est la fortune de la guerre_," he replied, with an air of
_affected_ triumph; "but as for preference, _reste à savoir_."

"Upon my word, Winyard's coolness is admirable," said Lord Gascoigne,
"and I would bet an even hundred that he is right. Georgina, as he
calls her, I dare say understands a thing or two by this time, and
knows how to hoodwink Glenmore." No sooner had Lord Albert handed Lady
Glenmore into her carriage, than he returned swiftly, with a faint,
sickening hope that he might not yet be too late to catch at least one
precious look more of Adeline; nor was he disappointed, for he met
her suddenly, standing near the door with her party. Addressing Lady
Delamere with an _empressement_ of manner, and an intonation of voice,
that spoke the temper of his soul, his eyes fixed upon Lady Adeline's,
he scarcely knew what it was he said to Lady Delamere, till the extreme
coldness of the latter, and her marked asperity of reply, checked the
flow of his feelings, and he remained mute and abashed, when the silver
sound of Lady Adeline's voice, inquiring for Lady Glenmore, re-animated
him.

"The heat was overpowering," she observed, "and she could not be
surprised that any one had fainted; she herself had suffered from it."

Lord Albert made some answer, expressive of concern for her; and gazing
at her with unrepressed tenderness, he remarked the myrtle sprig in her
breast; for it was associated in his mind with some recollections that
made it, in his estimation, an object of infinite interest. At that
instant it dropped on the ground. He stooped to recover it hastily;
and as he half tendered to restore it to her, said, "Its freshness
was surprising, considering the atmosphere it had been in for so many
hours; yet not so, neither," he added, "when I remember where it has
been placed: but it is not worthy of such felicity. Allow me to retain
it, for I, at least, can envy and appreciate its happy fate." A glow
of lustrous joy illumined Lady Adeline's countenance; and if before
the agitation of doubt and sorrow had shook her frame, an emotion not
less intense, though proceeding from feelings the very opposite, now
affected her.

    "Far as distress the soul can wound,
      'Tis pain in each degree:
    'Tis bliss but to a certain bound;
      Beyond is agony."

Her emotion could not escape Lord Albert's observation, nor could
he mistake its cause. With all the warmth of renewed and genuine
affection, he again whispered to her,

"Adeline, will you be at home to-night if I come?"

Before she could reply, Lady Delamere's carriage was called. She turned
rather abruptly to Lady Adeline, saying, "Adeline, come; the carriage
waits;" and at the same instant Mr. Foley, who had been in quest of it,
joined them, as though in much haste.

"If you delay an instant, Lady Delamere," he said, "your carriage must
drive off, and then it is difficult to tell when you may get away."

"Adeline," cried Lady Delamere, speaking authoritatively, "take Mr.
Foley's arm." And at the same time courtesying coldly to Lord Albert,
she showed him his attendance was not desired, and hurried after her
niece and daughters; for Lady Adeline, confused and agitated, had only
time to cast a look at Lord Albert, and was in a manner obliged to
suffer herself to be led away by Mr. Foley.

Lord Albert stood for a moment like a statue: the sprig of myrtle,
however, was in his hand, or he might have fancied he had dreamed the
scene, so quickly had it passed. "What can this mean?" he said to
himself, lingering on the spot where Lady Adeline had parted from him,
quite unconscious of the crowd that passed by him in all directions.
But where is one more alone than in a crowd? His reverie, however, was
speedily broken in upon by hearing Lady Hamlet Vernon's name loudly
called; and the next instant, as she was passing, unattended, to go
out, she said to him:

"Do, Lord Albert, be so obliging as to give me your arm." In common
courtesy he complied; but it was mechanically, and like the action of
one in a dream. "You had better let me set you down, Lord Albert, if
your carriage is not up, or you will never get away." An anxious wish
to leave a scene in which he had now no interest, induced him to avail
himself of the proposal. He leaped in after her, and they drove rapidly
away. He said something expressive of thanks to her, of the crowd, of
the heat, of Lady Glenmore; and this brought them to Cleveland-row,
when their progress was stopped, and the clatter of horses, and
the crash of carriages, and the screams of women, and the oaths of
servants, resounded in all directions. Lord Albert hastily looked out,
and saw Lady Delamere's equipage, which had been forced out of the
line among other carriages, and, in order to disentangle itself, was
backing so as to come immediately parallel with Lady Hamlet Vernon's.
He was grateful to think it was not in any present danger at least;
but in lowering the glass and looking out to see what had occasioned
the disturbance, he had forgotten and left the myrtle sprig on the
seat of the carriage, and did not remark, in reseating himself, that
Lady Hamlet Vernon had taken it up and was holding it in her hand, so
absorbed was he in anxiety for Lady Adeline's possible danger.

Lady Delamere's carriage was by this time in contact with that of
Lady Hamlet Vernon's. Lord Albert was just about to put his head
again out of the window, to assure the former there was no danger,
when he saw Lady Adeline lean back suddenly in the carriage, and at
the same instant one of her cousins, as he thought, by her desire
quickly drew up the window, evidently to prevent all communication.
Lord Albert could not mistake this action. It perplexed and wholly
overthrew all his presence of mind; and under the painful pressure of
contending feelings he made some brief excuse to Lady Hamlet Vernon, of
endeavouring to see if the carriage could be extricated, and opening
the door he darted out, without any thought but that of yielding to the
impulse of his feelings, and proceeded home in a state of distraction.




CHAPTER VI.

INTRIGUE.


As soon as Lord Albert was alone, and could recall his scattered
senses, he reviewed every look and every gesture of Lady Adeline; and
notwithstanding all that passed at the drawing-room and subsequently,
notwithstanding the marked coldness and disapprobation which her manner
had of late implied, he yet thought that her real feelings were not
those, at least, of indifference towards him; and he resolved to try
the issue of calling in South Audley-street that evening, as he had
proposed to her.

For this purpose, he got away early from a ceremonious dinner which
he was obliged to attend, and which appeared to him to last longer
than any dinner had ever done before: and with his heart and head full
of Adeline, and of Adeline alone, he found himself once more in her
presence. Lady Delamere and her daughters, and one or two others, were
sitting around Lady Dunmelraise's couch, amusing her with accounts
of the drawing-room; but Lady Adeline was at the piano-forte, and
Mr. Foley sitting by her, with a certain indescribable air of being
established in his place by right.

At one glance of his eye, Lord Albert took in the whole room on
entering, together with the relative position of its occupants; and
his feelings underwent a sudden and painful revulsion. He advanced,
however, towards Lady Dunmelraise, who extended her hand to him, but in
a way that he could not mistake; and her coldness struck an additional
chill to his heart. From Lady Delamere and her daughters he met no
kindlier greeting; and he determined at once to try if Adeline's heart
was equally shut against him. For this purpose he moved towards her;
and although she could not see him, her back being turned to that
part of the room from whence he came, yet she heard his approaching
footstep, and trembled in every nerve.

Mr. Foley, who had followed Lady Hamlet Vernon's advice respecting his
own conduct, and who lost no opportunity in acting in conformity to
it, was now determined that he would not resign his seat or quit his
station near Lady Adeline. The latter, on her part, had been too much
agitated by her own feelings to see things in their true light; and
was glad of any person to talk to, in order to conceal her emotion. But
no artificial means were sufficiently powerful to still the beatings of
her heart; and when Lord Albert inquired after her health, saying, he
hoped she had not suffered from the morning's fatigue, she started at
the sound of his voice, although she expected to hear it, and made some
hurried reply, which he construed into a disdain of his inquiries.

Lord Albert, wretched and astonished, stood mute; questioning within
himself if this could really be the same Adeline whom he had a
few hours ago seen with such a different expression in her whole
countenance and demeanour, as to make him doubt the evidence of his
senses. He would at once have broken through the mystery, could he
have obtained her ear for a moment; but the presence of Mr. Foley,
who pertinaciously, and, as it appeared to Lord Albert, in defiance
of him, kept his place, prevented all explanation. And then again
returned those false conclusions which arose from jealous doubt; and
he conceived that it would be unworthy of himself even to seek an
explanation from one whose evident preference of another appeared to
him so very decided.

In this dark spirit of jealous indignation, he turned away, and
sank into gloomy silence. Could he have known what was passing in
Lady Adeline's breast, he would have acknowledged the justice of
her feelings; he would have seen that all which seemed coldness and
indifference was only the result of a proper sense of what she owed
herself; and that under that assumed demeanour lay hid the truest,
warmest love. Strange as it may appear on a slight review of the matter
(although it is the common infirmity of human nature never to see
its own defects), he was not aware of the effect which his constant
intercourse with Lady Hamlet Vernon produced on the minds of all those
who witnessed his intimacy with her; and, perhaps, as matters now
stood, even if he had been at one time inclined to own himself in the
wrong, the still greater dereliction from all truth and delicacy, which
he thought he discovered both in Lady Adeline and Lady Dunmelraise,
respecting their behaviour to him, completely exonerated him in his
opinion, and he lost all sense of the evil of his own conduct in
blaming theirs.

Little did Lord Albert dream (indeed, in the excitement of greater
things, he had totally forgotten it) that the sprig of myrtle which
Lady Adeline had given him that morning, and which had been apparently
the medium of so much mutual tenderness, had been seen by her in Lady
Hamlet Vernon's hand, when their carriages were entangled in coming
from the drawing-room. It was this circumstance, combined with Lord
Albert's being again in assiduous attendance on one whom she was now
compelled to consider in the light of a rival, that had made Lady
Adeline draw up the glass at the moment Lord Albert was about to speak
to her, in order to escape witnessing so painful a truth. As she threw
herself back in the carriage, and reflected on the unworthiness of his
conduct, she became the victim of the most agonizing feelings; for what
is so painful as the conviction of unworthiness in the object of our
love? and it was this conviction which had effected the alteration in
her manner towards him, which he could not but observe from the first
moment of his entering the room.

While she was actuated by these sentiments, Lord Albert, on his part,
writhed under the idea that Mr. Foley was his favoured rival, and that
he was only allowed to witness his triumph, in order that he might
be provoked to become the party who should break off the engagement
existing between him and Lady Adeline. But this he inwardly determined
should never be the case. He endeavoured, therefore, at the present
moment, to devour his chagrin, and force himself to converse on
indifferent topics; addressing himself, however, to Lady Dunmelraise,
rather than to Lady Adeline. Among others, he made allusion to the
_fête_ which was to take place at Avington Park the day after the
following, and expressed his regret that he had been unable to procure
the tickets which he had hoped to have presented to herself and Lady
Adeline; "a circumstance," he added, "which I consider very unfair,
since I was one of the original subscribers to this _fête_; but the
names of the parties to be inserted have been all chosen by ballot, and
my single voice alone did not prevail in obtaining the insertion of
those whom I wished to be on the list."

This was really the fact, however extraordinary it may appear. Lord
Albert, with the other persons who formed the committee appointed
to give and arrange this _fête_, had paid five hundred guineas each
towards defraying the expense, but not one of them had the power of
inviting any individual apart from the consent of the whole body; and
as Lady Dunmelraise and her daughter were not of that circle which Lady
Tilney and her _coterie_ considered to be _ton_, Lord Albert's wishes
on this point, which were perfectly sincere, had been wholly unattended
to. Under the circumstances, however, in which he stood in the opinion
of all those who now heard him, the exclusiveness of this measure could
not be comprehended or believed, and, in short, passed for a mere
deception.

His excuse, consequently, was received with great coldness by Lady
Dunmelraise, who only replied, "That, as to herself, her going was
quite out of the question; and as to her daughter," she added with
emphasis, "I dare say Adeline has no wish to be there." Here the
subject dropped; and Lord Albert, torn by a thousand contradictory
feelings, could no longer continue to play so painful a part as that
which he now saw devolved upon him. In this state of mind he quitted
Lady Dunmelraise's house, having bade her a cold adieu. Little did he
imagine it was for the last time.

If Lord Albert had exercised the power of sober reason, if the sorrow
he felt had been free from all reproach of conscience, he would not
have feared to look into his own breast, and would have sought counsel
from that best adviser, his own mind, in the quiet of his chamber; "for
a man's mind is wont to tell him more than seven watchmen that sit
upon a high tower." But miserably he had suffered many entanglements
to embarrass his steps, and direct them from the straight-forward
path. The natural consequence of this was, that his mind had become a
chaos, in which he distinguished nothing clearly; and in the bitterest
moments of suffering, instead of coolly resorting to his understanding,
as he once would have done, he now always sought to elude reflection
by plunging into crowds. Whenever we dread to be left alone with our
own thoughts, we are in peril. This melancholy change in Lord Albert's
character was one which the alteration in his mode of life, and his
associates, had in a short period of time effected.

Instead, therefore, of returning home when he left South Audley street,
Lord Albert drove to Lady Glenmore's, who was that night to receive the
_coterie_ of their peculiar circle for the first time at her own house.
There had been no little arrangement on Lady Tilney's part, as well
as on Lady Tenderden's, to give to Lady Glenmore's _soirée_ its full
effect in the annals of _ton_, by stamping it with that exclusive mark
of self-arrogated distinction, of which they considered themselves to
be the sum and seal.

No pains had been spared by these ladies, therefore, to render this
assemblage of persons select, according to their acceptation of the
meaning of the word, and, _pour trancher le mot_, as they said, to
exclude every one not on their own private lists, with the limited
exception of those _diplomates_ and official persons whom Lord
Glenmore's ministerial situation obliged them to permit Lady Glenmore
to invite.

At Glenmore House there was of course assembled, on the present
evening, the Tilneys, Leinsengens, Tenderdens, Boileaus, Gascoignes, De
Cheres, and the rest of the _élite_ who formed the _société choisie_ of
Lady Tilney; and as the latter looked around the apartments, and only
saw there those whom in fact _she_ had bidden, she was gratified with
this fresh accession of arbitrary power, and considered it no small
triumph thus to have set the seal of her supremacy over the yielding
Lady Glenmore, who might, under other circumstances, if she had not
been an ally, have proved a formidable enemy. As it was, Lady Tilney
expressed the sense of her satisfaction by a thousand _cajoleries_,
which one woman knows so well to practise upon another when it suits
her purpose. She praised Lady Glenmore's dress (that touchstone of
female friendship), although she could not help saying apart to Lady
Tenderden, that it was a pity Lady Glenmore still persisted in her
_baroque_ modes, which in fact were no modes at all, but contrivances
of her own. To herself, Lady Tilney however next observed, that Lady
Glenmore's choice of society was excellent, and that the manner in
which she had arranged her rooms was managed with infinite taste.

These approving, encouraging speeches, from one so versed in the
knowledge of the world, and so much looked up to as the arbiter of the
elegancies of life, together with all the other incense of flattery
which was lavished upon Lady Glenmore on every side, could not fail of
taking some effect on her mind. Young, fair, unformed in character,
brought up by fond and indulgent parents, who thought she never could
err, and who had miserably neglected to implant those religious
principles in her breast which alone give stability to character, which
impart strength by making us aware of our own weakness, Lady Glenmore
was launched on a scene where dangers surrounded her in every shape,
and which she was wholly unprepared either to foresee or to sustain.
Gentle, amiable,--as yet pure, and unsuspicious of evil, from being
herself free from it,--she was a fitting subject to be moulded into any
shape by any evil-designing person that knew gradually to undermine
her innocence without alarming her fears. Lady Glenmore's situation in
the world, therefore, with a husband incessantly employed in public
duties, consequently often absent, while she was thrown in the midst of
a peculiar society, which became, from various circumstances, her only
sphere of action, was one of infinite temptation and peril.

At first, as was seen, she mourned over the deprivation of her
husband's presence,--a husband whom she loved with child-like
tenderness; but time, _ton_, and necessity, soon softened down this
infantine regret, and merely at first as a solace for the pain she
endured in being absent from him, she entered on the routine of
dissipated pleasure which presented itself to her on all sides. No
wonder, then, that those worldly pursuits, which were at first resorted
to as palliatives for pain, became gradually habitual and necessary to
her; and it is the fatal but inevitable consequence of such a habit of
life, to unfit the capacity (even the best and most vigorous capacity)
for any higher or nobler aim.

In the thoughtless vivacity of her age, alive to the zest of gaiety and
pleasure, her better qualities lay dormant; and in this Circean circle
her beauty and her youth were certain passports to general admiration,
independently of all the adventitious circumstances by which she was
environed. On the present occasion, when for the first time she opened
her house, she appeared the presiding spirit that gave life, animation,
and novelty even to the _blasé_ and hackneyed beings around her.
Had Lady Glenmore used, without abusing, the many advantages of her
brilliant station, she would not have been to blame, whatever may be
said by gloomy ascetics; nor would they have had power to lead her into
danger, had she possessed the stay and guide which a husband's constant
presence in society always affords.

This, however, was not _her_ case; and the very nature of her ingenuous
and guileless disposition became, in her present circumstances, an
additional source of danger, since it rendered her the easy prey of the
experienced and practised in deception, by too many of whom she was
surrounded, and who, envious of that purity they affected to despise,
were restless agents in endeavouring to reduce it to their own corrupt
level. It was from some such motive as this, rather than from any
impulse of love or passion, that Mr. Leslie Winyard first paid Lady
Glenmore attention. He was clever, and knew well how to be prodigal of
assiduities to the one object of his pursuit, in contradistinction to
the contempt in which he apparently held all others. This flatters
the vanity of the individual to whom they are addressed, and proves a
ready passport to a woman's smiles, particularly when experiencing that
perfect _délaissement_ which is most felt in a crowd, where "there is
none to bless us, none whom we can bless."

Under these circumstances Lady Glenmore first listened to Mr. Leslie
Winyard; and that advantage once gained, he had art enough to avail
himself of it as a step towards intimacy. In a very short space of
time, he so far succeeded as to raise at least a _bruit sourd_ of
his being _l'objet préféré_; an idea which at this period, could any
real friend of Lady Glenmore's have suggested to her, she would have
started from with indignation; but as it was, she continued laughing
and talking on the present occasion with Mr. Leslie Winyard. Had she
overheard the observations made upon her by various persons, more
particularly those of Lady De Chere and Lord Boileau, she might have
learned a lesson which she was destined to buy at a higher price.

"Well, for a _debutante_," said Lord Boileau, "I think _la petite_
Georgina has made considerable progress in her career. And how does
Glenmore take it?"

"Oh!" replied Lady De Chere, "as every one does what they cannot help,
I suppose. Besides, doubtless, he has other things to think of, and
must feel glad to have escaped her childish fondness: it must have
been exceedingly tiresome; and, after all, the sooner a matrimonial
understanding is settled upon a right and proper footing, the better
for both parties."

"Very true, Lady De Chere; and nobody settles those matters so well as
yourself; you are a model for all married ladies; so much _retenu_, so
much _bienséance_, and such a lady-like way of doing exactly what you
choose, and allowing De Chere to do the same. It is the only way for
married persons to be comfortable, or _comme il faut_."

"I am glad you think so, for that has long ago been Lady Boileau's
opinion," replied Lady De Chere, with one of her most contumelious
smiles, and left Lord Boileau to the satisfaction of his reflections on
domestic happiness.

"Pardon me," said Lord Baskerville, gently pulling him aside, and
conducting the Comtesse Leinsengen to the other apartment, "but
_en qualité de preux_, hem! I must be permitted to say, _Place aux
dames_--a-hem!"

"Oh! my reveries," rejoined Lord Boileau, "were on very every-day
topics; they can be resumed at any time; and I am happy in the honour
of--"

"Getting out of de way," quickly interrupted the Comtesse, who had the
happy knack of cutting all long speeches short, "_milles graces_:"
and she glided past him with a sliding bow, adding aside to Lord
Baskerville, "I would always make my best thanks to him for dat; he is
quite a dullification. _Mais voilà du nouveau_," she went on to say, in
the same breath, looking towards Lady Glenmore and Mr. Leslie Winyard,
who were still conversing; "dat is always de way with your English
virtuosos; dey go _grand train_ when dey do go. You are an odd people
altogether; always _en caricatura_. _Et le mari farouche apprivoisé!_
quite used to it already! Well, he is more sensible dan I took him for;
_vogue la galère_." And by this time she had approached close to Lady
Glenmore with her sliding step.--"I wished to make you my courtesy,
and pay you my compliments on the brilliancy of your _soirée_; and I
am happy to see you did not suffer more from your indisposition at
the drawing-room. Indeed, I am sure you could not, for I never saw
you looking more _triomphante_ than to-night. That heat was enough to
kill one; but you had only a _vapeur_; and I assure you it was quite
becoming: was it not, Lord Baskerville?"

"Oh, done in excellent style, as all that Lady Glenmore does must
be--a-hem! quite in good taste; no distortions or hysterics or vulgar
violences; all suavity and gentleness--a-hem! never saw so beautiful a
specimen of feint in my life--hem!"

At that moment Lord D'Esterre came up to make his bow to Lady Glenmore,
and the Comtesse Leinsengen walked abruptly away, saying, "De very
sight of dat man gives me what you call de blue and de green devils."

But Lady Hamlet Vernon was quite of a different opinion; she had long
been a fixture in the door-way, looking anxiously for his arrival. It
was late when he came, and she sought to attract his attention, and
engage him in conversation. Solicitous as she was to learn the cause of
his having left her in such an unaccountable manner in Cleveland-row,
she did not immediately enter upon that subject, but said something
expressive of a general interest in his welfare, and of concern at
seeing him look unwell. He eluded her inquiries, and professed being in
perfect health; but she was evidently aware that his mind had undergone
some sudden change since she had seen him at the drawing-room, for he
no longer spoke in the abstracted manner he had done when there, but
joined with an apparent animation and interest in a conversation which
she dexterously led to topics that she knew to be most in accordance
with his tastes and habits, and particularly so when he was depressed
and under the influence of blighted feelings; at which times he never
failed to seek refuge in dreams of ambition and power.

Though Lord Albert D'Esterre had never yet arrived at that degree
of intimacy with Lady Hamlet Vernon which might have induced him to
open his whole heart to her, on its dearest interests, yet there
always seemed to him to be a tacit and delicate understanding of his
sentiments, which he felt was soothing, and believed was sincere;
while, on her part, there was a consummate art in appearing to
compassionate his disappointment, while, at the same time, she never
failed in administering some baneful suspicion, or insinuating some
deteriorating observation on the character and conduct of Lady Adeline
and her mother, in respect to their behaviour towards himself.

Had Lady Hamlet Vernon, by any incautious or violent language, betrayed
her own malignant feelings, his eyes would have been at once unsealed;
but all she said was so well adapted to effect what she intended, to
throw his mind into a sea of doubts, and yet leave no suspicion of her
intending to do so, that he yielded, by degrees, an unwilling belief
to this sapping, undermining influence, so totally destructive of his
peace.

While listening to discourse of this kind, their conversation was
interrupted by Lord Raynham's addressing Lady Hamlet Vernon as he
passed her, putting some common-place question (to which, however, he
did not wait to hear an answer) about the ensuing breakfast, and then
he walked on, talking to himself as usual.

Lady Hamlet Vernon turned quickly to Lord Albert, saying, "Of course
you _must_ be there!"

He replied vaguely, apparently not knowing what he was saying; and it
was evident to Lady Hamlet Vernon, that, for some reason or other, the
mention of the breakfast raised in his mind a perplexity of thoughts,
for he relapsed into an abstracted mood, and became perfectly silent.
She was too wary to make any direct observation upon this, and too much
accustomed to the fluctuation of his spirits not to know that they
must be suffered to ebb and flow without animadversion on her part, if
she desired to maintain her influence over him; but she determined
secretly to trace the cause of this sudden change to its source, and
felt sure that there was something connected with the breakfast of
higher interest to him than itself. She endeavoured to regain his
attention by turning her conversation into other channels; but in vain:
the spell was on him, and soon afterwards he glided from her side and
left the assembly.

Lady Glenmore's party was prolonged to a late hour, and when the people
began to move, a considerable time elapsed before they could all
depart. To dissipate the _ennui_ of these last moments, Lady Glenmore
went to her piano-forte, and, in that excitement of spirit which the
incense of flattery and the consciousness of worldly success inspires,
she sang in her very best manner and in her most brilliant style,
and was herself so absorbed in the sweet sounds she made, that she
perceived not that the last of her visitors was gone, till, on looking
up, she beheld no one save Mr. Leslie Winyard leaning over her chair.
Abashed and somewhat confused, she scarce knew why, Lady Glenmore
was about to rise, when Mr. Winyard entreated her just to finish the
romance. "It is only two stanzas more," he said, in his most entreating
and persuasive tone. Fluttered, and not wishing to show she was so,
she thought it better to comply, and endeavour to recover herself while
singing. In this she succeeded to a certain degree; and having sang the
two stanzas he pleaded for, she arose with an intention of immediately
retiring, when Mr. Leslie Winyard, who had always _l'apropos du moment_
at command, contrived again to arrest her departure, by starting some
question which she could not avoid answering, and then proceeding to
further converse; while Lady Glenmore, on her part, caught by the
glitter of his wit, was amused, and laughed in gaiety of spirit.

This scene had continued fully half an hour after every body had left
the room, when Lord Boileau, who had been one of the last to go away,
made his reappearance suddenly in the apartment where they were sitting.

"I beg you a thousand million of pardons, Lady Glenmore; I am sadly
afraid I--I have intruded. I am vastly unfortunate; I must seem
exceedingly impolite; quite accidental, I assure you. The truth is,
my carriage did not arrive, and rather than wait any longer in the
room below, I ventured to come up stairs again. You will, I trust,
therefore, pardon my reappearance. But, Winyard, if your carriage is
waiting, as I believe it has been for some time, will you allow it to
set me down, and I will send it back immediately?"

"Oh yes!" cried Leslie Winyard, "with the greatest pleasure; by all
means."--And Lord Boileau turned to go away as he spoke. Lady Glenmore
happily, at the moment, felt the awkwardness of her situation, and
had sufficient presence of mind to say, "Stop, Lord Boileau, I beg.
Mr. Leslie Winyard, I must make my adieus, and wish you good night.
I am afraid you will find it dull waiting alone till Lord Boileau's
carriage returns." She said this with a determination of manner which
sufficiently proved to Mr. Leslie Winyard that he ought to depart,
and not press matters further at that time. He bowed, therefore, and
whispering something in her ear with an appearance of familiarity,
reluctantly took his leave.

As he joined Lord Boileau on the staircase, the latter said to him,
in a low tone, "You will never forgive me, Winyard, I fear, for this
interruption; but how very cleverly the Glenmore turned it off! I give
her great credit for her address."

Leslie Winyard made no answer, but smiled complacently, and in a manner
that left little doubt of the innuendo which he wished his silence to
convey; while he inwardly triumphed in the assurance, that he had in
Lord Boileau a willing witness and ready herald of all he could wish to
be believed.




CHAPTER VII.

THE TICKET.


The allusion made by Lord Albert D'Esterre on the preceding evening
to the _fête_ at Avington Park, his excuses and explanations on the
subject of the ticket, together with Lady Dunmelraise's doubtful mode
of receiving them, were circumstances not lost on Mr. Foley; and the
hope that he might not only please Lady Adeline by the attention, but
also, in the event of his success, tacitly throw suspicion on Lord
Albert's sincerity, determined him on endeavouring to procure her,
himself, a ticket for the _fête_.

Consequently, at an early hour the following morning, he sought Lady
Hamlet Vernon, to request her assistance in the accomplishment of
his wishes. The latter possessed too much penetration not to see, in
Mr. Foley's anxiety, an elucidation of the disquiet and uneasiness
betrayed by Lord Albert D'Esterre when the subject of the breakfast
had been accidentally alluded to at Lady Glenmore's by Lord Raynham;
and imagined that she perceived, at once, a point where her own wishes
might be advanced, at the same time that she appeared attending only
to those of the friend who now applied to her. If it was clear to Lady
Hamlet Vernon that some misunderstanding, some unpleasant feeling, had
existed in Lord Albert's mind, connected with the subject, no better
or surer index of it could be found, than in the eager and pressing
solicitude displayed on the same point by the person whom she had
herself principally influenced in the attempt to become his rival; and
to procure the ticket so much wished for (if a possibility of doing
so remained) was therefore the immediate conclusion in Lady Hamlet
Vernon's mind.

In individuals similarly constituted, an explanation of sentiment, or
even of design, is not always requisite; an intuitive principle seems
to guide to the same point, and directs them generally to the use of
the same means; and no interpretation of his wishes was necessary on
the part of Mr. Foley, in the present instance, to ensure him the
earnest co-operation of Lady Hamlet Vernon. The conversation which
had passed on a former occasion between them, on the subject of Lord
Albert D'Esterre's engagement with Lady Adeline, and the result hinted
at of Mr. Foley's probable success, if disposed to hazard his suit,
was alone sufficient to produce an understanding throughout all future
manœuvres in the proceeding, and without a word passing to that
effect: therefore, on the occasion in question, Mr. Foley felt that he
left his application in Lady Hamlet Vernon's hands with a well-founded
assurance of its accomplishment, as far, at least, as her exertions
could promote such an issue.

In a few hours the ticket was procured and transmitted. On receiving
it, Mr. Foley proceeded, with a feeling approaching to triumph, to
South Audley-street; and in presenting it to Lady Dunmelraise, said
something about his happiness in offering what he thought would be
agreeable to Lady Adeline, and his hope that some other opportunity
would afford itself of proving that her wishes were always laws to him;
at the same time, to enhance his air of importance, throwing out hints
(as if carelessly) respecting the small number of persons who were to
constitute the _fête_, and the peculiarities attending its management,
all which insinuated the distinction attached to such as were amongst
the _prièes_. Lady Dunmelraise looked expressively at her daughter,
as she held the ticket in her hand; as though she would have said,
Lord Albert could not procure one; and Lady Adeline, who had sat like
a statue, not daring to trust herself to speak, lest she should betray
her feelings, now felt this silent appeal too much for endurance, and
sought her chamber, there to indulge in an unrepressed burst of sorrow.
"Yes," she cried, in broken utterance, as sobs choked her voice; "yes,
he is faithless, perfidious, and I--I am wretched."

While Lady Adeline gave way to this natural transport of wounded
feeling, her mother guessed too well what her poor child was suffering,
and though she suffered with her, yet she could, in the comparative
calmness of _her_ regret, consider how it was best to act; and Lady
Dunmelraise determined on the propriety and expediency of Adeline going
to the breakfast. She therefore continued to converse with Mr. Foley,
in order to settle all the necessary arrangements, saying,

"But by whom is Adeline to be _chaperoned_? There do not seem to be
many of our acquaintance going, unless, indeed, Lady Borrowdaile, Lady
Aveling, or Lady Feuillemorte; yet she would, I think, prefer Lady
Aveling."

"Pardon me," rejoined Mr. Foley; "none of those ladies are invited."

"Indeed! you astonish me! But the Duchess D'Hermanton; she, at least,
cannot be left out?"

"Her grace's name, I know, is not on the list," replied Mr. Foley.

"That is astonishing! Which of the nobility, then, now in London, are
to be of this party?"

"Those," answered Mr. Foley, "who are of the _scelta_."

"And pray who are those?" He named the Boileaus, De Cheres, Tenderdens,
Tilneys, Leinsengens, &c. &c. Lady Dunmelraise smiled, and then looked
rather grave.

"This would be laughable," she said, "if it were not melancholy to
think, that people can suffer themselves to be so led away by a love of
false distinction, as to attempt to set aside all that is truly good
and great, and to impose laws and rules upon society, whose general
tendency cannot be productive of any real advantage, but the reverse."
Mr. Foley affected to agree with her in part, but said, "There was
always, at all times, something of the same sort existing. It was a
species of excrescence," he said, "which grew out of the plethora
of the London world. It might be dangerous for some; but for Lady
Adeline--he conceived she might look at its folly, and _effleuré_ the
charm of its novelty and splendour, without the least danger."

"It is from this persuasion," rejoined Lady Dunmelraise, "that I can
augur no harm in her attending the breakfast, although I should be
sorry to see her always forming a component part of such a society.
But whom can she accompany on the present occasion? Is Lady Louisa
Blithewaite going?"

"She is: as a sister of the Duke of Mercington's, she has been
admitted."

"That will do," said Lady Dunmelraise. "She is the very person under
whose care I should like my Adeline to be placed. I will write to
her directly." Mr. Foley, who began to fear that after all he should
not carry his point, was now delighted; and he took leave of Lady
Dunmelraise, well pleased with the prospect of his success. When Lady
Dunmelraise had despatched her note to Lady Louisa Blithewaite, she
sought Lady Adeline in her chamber, whom she found in some measure calm
and composed.

"You see how it is, my dearest child; but your painful task will soon
be over, I trust. It is suspense only that is not to be borne, since
it prevents the mind from resting on any one point, or coming to any
conclusion; and it is for this very reason, my loved Adeline, that I
wish you to summon resolution and attend the breakfast. It is right
Lord Albert should know that we are aware of the idle subterfuge he
wished to palm upon our belief; and it is well, too, for your future
peace, that you should so convince yourself of his dereliction of all
honourable principle, that you will not in any after-moment fancy that
you have forfeited all happiness in losing him." By these and similar
reasonings and persuasions, Lady Dunmelraise convinced her daughter
that she ought to comply with her wishes, and prepare to meet this
painful trial. Having, therefore, given way to the infirmity of human
weakness only so far as that indulgence was necessary to a recovery of
self-management, Lady Adeline rallied her powers of mental control;
and with that steady serenity and determination of character which
proceeds from one only source, and which bears up those who act upon
its influence through all the storms of life, she acceded to whatever
Lady Dunmelraise required of her.

In the course of that day, Lord Albert called in South Audley-street;
but neither Lady Adeline nor her mother were at home. In the
distempered state of his mind, he thought he had been denied, and in
this idea he was almost confirmed by seeing Mr. Foley leave the house
a few moments after he had ridden from the door; though, in fact, this
was not the case, the latter having merely gone into the drawing-room
a short time before Lord Albert called, to leave a note explanatory of
some points respecting the hour of going to the _fête_, &c. &c. and
which Lady Dunmelraise had requested him to ascertain. The effect,
however, produced upon Lord Albert's imagination was the same as if
the fact had been so; and in this effervescence of mind he directed
his horse's head, with a feeling of something like habit, towards Lady
Hamlet Vernon's.

When the heart is bruised, and the understanding perplexed, it is
astonishing to think how the strongest minds turn to lean on some one
being whom they deem willing to soothe and share in their feelings;
and if it is a weakness, it is one so linked to all the best parts of
our nature, that there would be no advantage gained by exchanging it
for that cold hardness of self-sufficiency, to which some persons lay
claim as affording them a superiority over their fellow-creatures. Such
was certainly not Lord Albert's case. Whatever he might or might not
confess to himself, it was with a worn-out spirit that he sought Lady
Hamlet Vernon; and on hearing that she was at home, he threw himself
off his horse, and hastened into her presence. Although she was too
well skilled in reading the human heart, not to be aware that she owed
this visit rather to his displeasure in other quarters, than from a
spontaneous wish to enjoy her society, yet she received him, as she
always did, with those gentle smiles which captivate the heart, and
which is the temper ever sought for and expected in woman.

Lady Hamlet Vernon knew that the general selfishness of man seeks
only the reflection of his own sensations from the sympathy of women;
and that whatever cause a woman may have of pain or pleasure, it is
_his_ feelings, and not her own, which she must consult, soothe, and
influence; and that, in short, when she ceases to be his sunshine, he
ceases to court her influence.

It was acting under this conviction, which made Lady Hamlet Vernon,
with infallible delicacy and truth of tact, neither seem to search into
secrets which Lord Albert did not choose to reveal, nor yet appear
carelessly ignorant of the melancholy restlessness by which she saw
him affected; but alternately she soothed, flattered, and sympathized
in all he said, till at last she succeeded, for the time being, in
reconciling him with himself, and in a great measure allaying the
irritation of those various feelings which almost distracted him when
he first entered her apartment.

Before he took his leave, it was finally arranged between them, that
he should accompany her to the _fête_ the next day, if he could leave
Downing-street in time; and if he could not, he would, he said, meet
her at Avington Park, and go there with Lord Glenmore, who, in the
event of his being detained, would be detained also.

While thus variously agitated had been the feelings of some, whose
hearts, by circumstances, had become interested in this idle _fête_,
the principal movers in it, in _their_ way, were not less anxious for
its success and brilliancy. For the preservation of its exclusive and
chosen character, and the arrangement of all its endless detail of
luxury, each member of the _société choisie_ was more or less busy
and _affairé_. Lady Tilney, with her usual activity, was the first
in her exertions; driving to the houses of all connected with the
arrangements, examining into every minute particular, and, above all,
guarding against the possibility of any persons whose name was not
on her list creeping in through the weakness of some member of the
committee, who, in a moment of unallowed natural feeling, might have
invited a sister, or a mother, or a brother, who were from a class
_without the pale_.

At Lady Ellersby's she met Lady Tenderden, and the Countess Leinsengen,
and Lady De Chere, and Lord Boileau, who came in, as though by chance,
one after the other, each saying, in different words, the same thing.

"How fortunate I am to have met you! I wished to know at what hour you
are to go to Avington Park to-morrow;" and all applied to Lady Tilney.
She named three o'clock.

"La!" cried Lady Ellersby, "I shall not have awoke from my first sleep
at that hour: surely four o'clock is quite time enough."

"_I_ shall not go till den," cried the Comtesse Leinsengen. "One has
always enough of dose tings dat last for ever. Breakfast, dinner,
supper, and den breakfast again, before one gets away."

"Oh! but you know," replied Lady Tenderden, "dis _fête_, my dear
comtesse, is not like any other; dere will be no one dere but
ourselves, our own _société_; and dere are so many pleasant tings to be
done,--going on de water, walking about, and de _loterie_; one would
not choose to lose dat."

"Oh! certainly not," exclaimed Lady Boileau. "I am told there are to be
some exceedingly magnificent things. Lord Albert D'Esterre has bought
some really fine jewels."

"Perhaps so," said Lady De Chere in her blunt way; "but we all know
_who_ will have these: the chances are wisely ordained _beforehand_."

"Have you got your _billet de loterie_?" asked the Comtesse Leinsengen
of the speaker.

"No," replied Lady De Chere with an air of pique, "but I _am_ to have
one."

"Certainly," rejoined Lady Tilney, who read the Comtesse's intended
triumph; and who chose to show her, on many occasions, that if any one
had a right to tyrannize it was herself, or that at least, if such a
thing were attempted, it should be _à qui mieux mieux_.

"Certainly, Lady Boileau, there will be a lottery ticket for _you_, and
all the _other_ ladies; at least, I shall conceive it exceedingly wrong
indeed if there is not. But should there be any mistake, depend upon
_my_ rectifying it. And now, ladies," she continued, addressing them
generally, "there is one point we have not touched upon--our costume."

"Oh! _demi-toilette_, of course," exclaimed Lady Tenderden.

"Of course," echoed Lady Tilney, afraid lest it should be thought
that she had asked the question with a view to arrange her own dress
according to her friends' dictation: "but I meant, should we have a
_change_ of dress for the evening?"

"Oh! what a trouble!" said Lady Ellersby.

"Yes, my dear; but you know, after walking about all day, our dress
will not look fresh for the evening," said Lady Boileau. "However, I
am told, that among other _galanteries_ our cavaliers have engaged a
certain number of milliners, to be in attendance with every kind of
decoration, so that we need think little on that point."

"No, really!" cried Lady Ellersby, with something more than her usual
animation: "that is well imagined."

"And I will tell you," said Lady Tenderden, "what is the prettiest
ting of all, de best imagined possible,--every lady is to have her
cipher formed of her chosen flower. As to me, I shall be like Louis
de Fourteenth's favourite, and am to have _un salon tout tapissé de
jonquilles_. After all is said, dere is nobody but the French dat know
what it is to be gallant. And now, _mes chères dames_, I must depart.
If any thing occurs, any change takes place, you will let me know. You
have all settled your parties for going, of course: mine has been long
arranged wid de Glenmores and Mr. Leslie Winyard. Adieu, adieu!"

"Of course," said the Comtesse Leinsengen: "mi ladi need not to have
taken de pains to inform us on dat subject."

"I think," said Lady Tilney, "considering that this party is made
expressly by _us_, and is quite a thing apart, that she might have
passed over for once her tiresome preference of every thing French. But
she is always making out that it is the French alone who do every thing
in perfection; and that is exceedingly impolite, to say the least of
it."

"Very true," added Lady De Chere; "and considering that she is what she
is by having married an Englishman, _c'est un peu fort_."

"But," said Lady Tilney, breaking abruptly off, "I must say adieu.
_Chère_ Lady Ellersby, adieu! Remember! three o'clock, at the latest,
to-morrow. And we positively can allow no more tickets. No persuasions
or entreaties must be suffered to prevail. The affair is finished. I
have put my veto on the D'Hermanton," she added, turning round as she
approached the door: "that would have been too much."

"I wonder," said Lady Ellersby, as Lady Tilney left the room, "that she
is not dead with fatigue. Surely never any body did so much."

"To so little purpose," said the Comtesse Leinsengen sharply; "for,
after all, de public of your nation are a great deal too _revêche_ to
let any one person lead dem about _à droite et à gauche_. Much better
it is to cut de matter short, to have one's own _société_, and never
care what any body says or does or tinks. Please oneself one's own way,
dat is de true liberty. But dat ladi has so _many fire-irons_ all going
at once, some of dem must fail, and den she is out of humour."

There was a general smile at what the comtesse had said; and they all
enjoyed hearing Lady Tilney found fault with, though no one exactly
chose to be the person who should hazard such an opinion.

"Ah! comtesse," observed Lady Boileau, "you are the most amusing person
in the world."

"_Seulement parce que je suis la plus franche_," she replied; and
kissing her hand to Lady Ellersby, glided out of the room.

"If she had said _brusque_, instead of _franche_," cried Lady De
Chere, "she would have been nearer the truth."

"Eh, eh, eh!" laughed Lady Ellersby, as she observed, "Perhaps so; but
it is like smelling salts to hear her remarks; and really I do not know
what I should do without something pungent now and then to keep me
awake."

"Besides," rejoined Lady Boileau, "we have all our own particular
meanings for particular phrases; and Comtesse Leinsengen is not the
only person who gives her own meaning to a phrase which, in its general
acceptation, is of quite a different import. Don't you agree with me,
Lady De Chere?"

"May be so. But in as far as regards myself, I always mean what I
say, though I do not say always all that I mean. But we are quite
philosophical, and I have no time for disquisitions; so, fair ladies,
good day, and may to-morrow be propitious for hats, caps, and
_falbalas_. In that we are all agreed. Farewell!" And she departed.

"My dear Lady Ellersby," said Lady Boileau, approaching her in a voice
of earnest entreaty, "do not let Lady Tilney forget my lottery-ticket;
for, after all, you know, one likes to have a _chance_ of the fine
things."

"Oh yes! ONE does. I will not forget. Trust to me."

"You are always _so_ good-humoured! Adieu, then, _till_ to-morrow! I
know you will not forget me."

"Not if you can prevent it," said Lady Ellersby to herself, as she
closed the door, and rose to ring her bell. "Send Fanchon to me." And
when Fanchon, the maid, obeyed the summons, her mistress said, "I
am half dead with the clamour of those dear friends of mine. Put my
_roquelaure_ over me, and let me sleep. See that I be not disturbed.
How loud they did all talk!"




CHAPTER VIII.

THE BREAKFAST.


Every one has felt, some time or other, that when the first warmth of
indignation against a loved object begins to cool, the recollection of
a thousand tender reminiscences comes floating in to soften and subdue
resentment; and that many an ebb and flow of fondness must take place
before the deep trace of love is washed from our remembrance. Thus it
was with Lady Adeline: there was a lurking weakness in her heart (if
the tenacity of true love can he called a weakness), which made her
loath to cast Lord Albert thence, even if he _were_ guilty, for the
moment, of deserting her.

Even in that case she thought he might be reclaimed. It was difficult,
it was impossible, to fathom the heart: who had a right to do so? and
with these thoughts she condemned herself as wrong and precipitate in
her judgment. The best, she conceived, that remained for her to do,
under her present painful circumstances, would be to retire to the
country, and await there the issue of his determination; but not to
brave him. Under the impression of these feelings, she lamented having
yielded her consent to be present at the breakfast.

"If I am to see him there," she exclaimed inwardly, "devoted to
another, what good end will it answer thus to add anguish to anguish?
And, at all events, Albert will think better of me if I avoid his
presence, and, by so doing, show how much I feel, and how little I am
desirous of prying into his conduct."

Lady Dunmelraise soon saw that such were the feelings of her daughter,
when, in the course of the day, a recurrence was made to the subject
of the breakfast; and it was with pleasure that she received a visit
from her sister, Lady Delamere, in the evening, from the hope that her
persuasions, joined to those which she had already availed herself of,
might have additional weight with Lady Adeline.

Many concurring circumstances had led both Lady Dunmelraise and Lady
Delamere to the conviction that Lord Albert was wholly undeserving of
such a treasure, and induced the suspicion that he perhaps enjoyed the
consciousness of being beloved by her daughter, while, at the same
time, he played with her feelings, and sacrificed them remorselessly
at the shrine of his own vanity. To impress their opinions upon her
Adeline's mind, Lady Dunmelraise conceived to be absolutely necessary,
with a view to wean her from her strong attachment: and so convinced
was she of the necessity of this measure, in order to restore Lady
Adeline to any thing like happiness, that much as it pained Lady
Dunmelraise to make her herself the witness of Lord Albert's desertion
and insincerity, yet she felt convinced that to do so would be at once
the kindest and most effectual measure.

In this she was confirmed by Lady Delamere; and with all the persuasion
of affection, and all the force of truth, they both represented the
matter in so strong a light to Lady Adeline, that she yielded her
feelings to their direction, saying,

"Well, dearest mamma and dearest aunt, make of me what you will, do
with me as you choose; but remember I am a poor automaton that can no
longer act or think for itself. I feel crushed, withered, wretched,
unable to do any thing but yield a passive obedience. In that I know I
am fulfilling my duty; and if I live, that thought must bring peace in
its train."

"_If_ you live!" exclaimed Lady Dunmelraise, shuddering, as she looked
earnestly at her altered countenance. "Dearest child! talk not thus:"
and as she pressed her to her breast, she felt that she must evermore
consider Lord Albert as the destroyer of her child's happiness. At
an early hour that evening, Lady Adeline retired to rest; and worn
out with the agitation of the day, yet calmed by the secret sense
of satisfaction which a fulfilment of duty and obedience to a loved
and loving parent never fails to produce, she fell into that sweet,
child-like sleep of innocence which is the balm of peace.

The morning came in lowering, and a few heavy drops of rain seemed to
announce the impending overthrow of the splendour of the _fête_; but
about midday the dark clouds broke away, and the sun came out clear
and bright, giving assurance of fair weather. By three o'clock, the
park, and the squares and streets in its immediate vicinity, presented
a gay sight in the splendid equipages that were waiting at the doors,
or driving to the destined scene of the rendezvous. Lady Adeline had
suffered herself to be attired in the dress her mother had prepared
for her, which was well adapted for the hour and scene, and at once
splendid, yet chastely beautiful: and as something of the natural
weakness of youth and vanity found a brief place even in the breast of
the ingenuous Adeline, a consciousness of her charms stole over her, as
she cast a rapid glance at her person reflected in her mirror, and she
thought with a feeling of something like renovated hope and pleasure;
"He may not deem me so beneath his attention." And then again a quick
return of reflection made her sigh; remembering how valueless the
affection is, how undeserving the name, which depends alone on personal
charms. But still a secret hope remained, that if she could once again
attract his regards, she might find the way to retain them on a sure
foundation.

As this hope, in despite of reason, took possession of her heart, it
tinged her cheek with a brighter hue, and gave an animation to her
whole appearance which even deceived those who loved her most. There
was a feeling of exultation in Lady Dunmelraise's breast, as she gazed
delightedly on this dear object of her solicitude; for conscious
that the gem within was as precious as the fair casket in which it
was enshrined, she thought that Lord Albert little knew his own true
interests in exchanging such a pearl of price for common merchandise;
and she was right.

When Lady Adeline arrived at Lady Louisa Blithewaite's, she found a
party assembled there, amongst whom were the Duke of Mercington and
Mr. Foley. The former was exceedingly struck with her appearance,
and manifested his admiration in a way not to be overlooked or
misunderstood, at the same time with all that delicacy which was due to
the person by whom it was excited. Lady Louisa Blithewaite received her
with marks of the greatest interest; and relieved the embarrassment she
felt on perceiving herself the object of general remark, by entering
immediately into discourse with her on various subjects connected with
the immediate object of their meeting.

As soon as the first awkwardness was passed, Lady Adeline recovered her
presence of mind, and joined in the conversation with that natural yet
cultivated understanding which is felt in touching on the most trivial
topics, as well as in discussing the most serious ones, and never fails
to win admiration and respect. Mr. Foley hovered around her, sometimes
leaning on the back of her chair, and affecting to speak to her with
the familiarity of intimacy; alluding to times and circumstances
of which the present company were ignorant, and endeavouring, by
this conduct, to wear the appearance of being an _attaché_ of Lady
Adeline's. But as she did not share in this intention, and her
conversation being directed equally to the different persons around,
his attempt was a failure.

It was impossible, at the present moment, but that Lady Adeline's
mind should be taken off from herself; and the bustle of arranging
how the parties should go, together with the constant and varied
homage she received from all present, but particularly from the Duke
of Mercington, which could not fail of being for the time gratifying,
all combined to produce that species of excitement which diffused an
animation and lustre over her features and manners altogether magical.

After much disquisition, it was finally arranged, that the Duke of
Mercington should accompany his sister and Lady Adeline in the same
carriage; and Mr. Foley, with evident mortification, was obliged to
attend another party. Nobody knew better than the duke how to render
himself agreeable when he chose it. There was a bland sunshine on his
countenance, and a kindness in his manner, which was a key to all
hearts; and on the present occasion he felt irresistibly impelled to
endeavour to please. Every word Lady Adeline spoke during the drive,
though her words were not many, and not directed to any subject
on which the stronger qualities of her mind could be called into
exercise, had yet so much originality in them, from that perfect
nature, unobscured by the factitious ways of the world, which makes
even the most trite and common things appear in a new light, that the
duke whispered to his sister, when they arrived at Avington Priory,
"She is perfection. I never met with such grace of mind."

On entering the gay, enchanted scene of the breakfast, all eyes were
directed towards Lady Adeline; and as the duke walked between her and
his sister, the envious whisper ran round, "Who is she? Who invited
her? How very odd she should be here!" but none durst openly find fault
with one whom the Duke of Mercington protected and countenanced. Lord
Gascoigne observed, as they walked in,

"So at last he is caught," to which Lord Baskerville maliciously
replied, "He may be caught--hem! but there are two words to that
bargain--a-hem! For my part, I would rather be the cobbler at the
corner of the street, who knows his stall's his own, than be in
the questionable position of any man, however great. I do not envy
him--hem!"

Mr. Foley continued to take every opportunity of affecting intimacy
with Lady Adeline; addressing her at every moment, asking her opinion
of the _fête_, of the arrangement, of the scene; and then passed
to observations upon the _superior_ beauty of Dunmelraise, and the
happiness of riding with her about that wild scenery: to all of which
she replied naturally, saying,

"They were perfectly different, and admitted of no comparison."

In this manner he endeavoured to create an appearance of greater
intimacy than belonged to common acquaintance; and then requested her,
if disengaged, to dance the first cotillon with him.

To this she agreed. But, in the meantime, the Duke of Mercington,
who had, with one of his _engouements_, selected Lady Adeline as
his favourite of the day, and therefore considered every other
person's approach an intrusion, being annoyed by Mr. Foley's constant
interruption of the conversation, proposed to his sister and Lady
Adeline, and their party, to go on the water. Although the duke could
not without positive rudeness exclude Mr. Foley as they entered the
boat, yet, by taking a seat on one side of Lady Adeline, and placing
his sister on the left, he secured something like a conversation
_suivie_, which he could not otherwise have done.

As they were embarking, the same junto of young men who had made their
remarks on the duke's party when he entered, now stood by the lake;
for the same system observed in Hyde Park, of arranging themselves
in line wherever there were women, in order, as Leslie Winyard said,
_pour se laisser admirer_, was adhered to on the present occasion. "His
grace," said Lord Baskerville, "seems to be really _épris_, and to be
meditating matrimony."

"Who is she?" again questioned Lord Gascoigne. "She must be something
quite new, for I never saw her before."

"Oh! she, you know," replied Lord Baskerville, who always affected to
know every body's story, "she is the girl that Lord Albert D'Esterre
was said to be engaged to, but who broke off the engagement from some
reason or other; probably because she had no intention of marrying a
field-preacher."

"It would have been a confounded pity if she had," growled Lord
Tonnerre. "She is a very beautiful creature. I should not care if I
married her myself."

"How very gallant you are become, Tonnerre," said Lord Boileau. "But,
Baskerville, you forget, in passing sentence on Lord Albert, that he
is become one of _us_, has cast his slough, and come out with a new
skin."

"Yes," replied Lord Gascoigne, "thanks to Lady Hamlet Vernon, he has
found out _que le diable n'est pas si noir_."

"I don't care," said Lord Baskerville, "what he has found out; but I
have found out that he is very disagreeable, and I never wish to have
him in my society--hem!"

"Pardon me," said Lord Gascoigne, "I think you are too severe to-day,
Basky. The man is well enough; mighty polite; makes a good bow; and is
well received by the ladies."

"Upon my word," observed Lord Tonnerre, "the women, now-a-days, are
all gone mad, I think, upon my word. I'd keep those under my care,
at least, in good order. One must have a tight hand upon the best
of them." At that moment, Lady Tenderden and Lady Glenmore arrived,
escorted by Mr. Leslie Winyard and two or three other young men. Every
body crowded round Lady Glenmore to pay her their court; hoped she
admired the _fête_ and the decorations: to all which she replied in the
affirmative with childish gaiety and delight.

"But you have not seen the bower, the beautiful bower," said Lord
Gascoigne; "allow me to conduct you thither."

"Oh! but first come and see my alcove _tout tapissé de jonquilles_;"
and they passed on, Lady Glenmore continuing to lean on Mr. Leslie
Winyard's arm, and tacitly rejecting the offer of Lord Gascoigne, in
that hurry of pleasure which leaves no capability for real enjoyment.

"Well," said Lord Baskerville, looking after Lady Glenmore, "I am of
the same opinion still. There is a sort of rude health and vulgar
jollity about that Lady Glenmore, hem! which she will never get rid of.
I wonder how Leslie Winyard can waste his time in that quarter."

"He does not _waste_ it, I can assure you," said Lord Boileau
significantly. "Remind me, Basky, to tell you a good story, of the
truth of which I myself am a witness. It happened on the night of _la
petite_ Georgina's party. I never looked so foolish in my life. I shall
never forget it."

"But the odd thing is," interrupted Lord Gascoigne, "that Glenmore, who
set out by being the most tenacious husband imaginable, is as quiet as
a mouse about it. How can you account for this, Tonnerre? Do you think
apathy is one of the fruits of marriage?"

"Why do you ask me the question, who have never tried? But this I am
certain of; I would keep my wife in order, if I were married to-morrow.
You had better ask Glenmore himself."

"So I will," said Lord Gascoigne, turning on his heel. "I will go look
for him for the purpose."

"What a cool hand Gascoigne is!" observed Lord Boileau, addressing Lord
Baskerville. "I would give the world to be like him."

"It might suit _you_."

"_Ehew!_" replied the latter, "but it wouldn't me;" and he walked
slowly away to join the Comtesse Leinsengen.

It was by this time pretty late in the afternoon, and the various
persons were beginning to draw together with a view to making up their
dinner _coteries_. Lord Albert and Lord Glenmore had been prevented,
as they anticipated they should, from setting out early by business.
The former had in consequence despatched a note to Lady Hamlet Vernon,
to let her know of his being detained beyond the hour she had named
for going to Avington Priory, but saying he would join her there;
and this had determined her to excuse herself from accompanying Lady
Glenmore's party, with whom she was to have gone; for, well aware of
all the circumstances attendant on Lady Adeline's being present at
the breakfast, she was particularly anxious to appear there herself
accompanied by Lord Albert D'Esterre.

Lady Hamlet Vernon, therefore, ordered her carriage a short time before
the hour named by Lord Albert for his departure; and having driven
slowly towards Avington Priory, she calculated the time so exactly,
that Lord Glenmore and Lord Albert overtook her on the road. They
kissed their hands to her as they passed, and she thought that Lord
Albert looked pleased in the idea that she might have waited for him.
Their carriages entered the gates of the Priory together; and having
alighted, Lady Hamlet Vernon took the offered arms of Lord Albert and
Lord Glenmore, and they proceeded in quest of Lady Glenmore and her
party, making inquiries, as they went, of every one if they had seen
her. Some said she was here, some there; and Lord Gascoigne, who now
approached, observed, that he had seen her last with Lady Tenderden,
Leslie Winyard, Raynham, Frank Ombre, &c. going towards Rosamond's
Bower. "But," continued he, "if one really wants to find any body in a
crowd, the way is, to sit down in one place. My advice, therefore, is
tranquilly to await their repassing; and you will have time enough to
see the lions afterwards." As he concluded this speech, he turned round
to Spencer Newcombe, and whispered in his ear, "I think Winyard owes me
one for this."

"Oh! a hundred, I should say; for

    'Quand on est jeune, et gentillette,
     On ne va pas au bois, fillette,
     On ne va pas au bois pour rien.'"

Lady Hamlet Vernon, however, on this occasion, rather wished to see
than be seen, and deemed it more agreeable to walk about leaning
upon Lord Albert D'Esterre's arm, and therefore replied, "I have not
patience to sit still; let us rather have the amusement of looking for
Lady Glenmore;" and as she spoke, they moved on.

"That affair goes on well," remarked Lord Gascoigne, as his eye
followed Lord Albert and Lady Hamlet Vernon.

"Yes," said Mr. Spencer Newcombe, "she is a clever woman; _elle pique
ses attachés_. I give her credit for having angled so dexterously. A
little while, and D'Esterre will be well landed."

While these persons thus passed their kindly comments, Lord Albert,
Lord Glenmore, and Lady Hamlet Vernon walked about the gardens, and
after a search of some time found Lady Tenderden, Lady Glenmore, and
their party, who were laughing and talking gaily in the alcove _tapissé
de jonquilles_. Mr. Leslie Winyard was playing with one of the long
ribands that pended from Lady Glenmore's hat, and she seemed listening
complacently to his conversation. The moment, however, that she beheld
Lord Glenmore, she darted towards him, her face beaming with pleasure,
and passing her arm through his, and looking up fondly in his face,
said something in a low voice, to which he replied with answering
tenderness; and as she continued to hang upon his arm, expressing her
admiration of the _fête_, he appeared to enter into her delight, and to
be as much amused as herself.

"What perfection of duplicity!" whispered Lord Boileau to Lord
Tonnerre, as they entered the alcove together, and witnessed this
meeting.

"And what a wide swallow _he_ has," replied the other; while Mr. Leslie
Winyard, mortified at the interruption which Lord Glenmore's arrival
had occasioned, but at the same time too much master of his art to
evince his _real_ feeling, endeavoured to show himself satisfied with
the semblance of a secret understanding between himself and Lady
Glenmore as to her conduct towards her husband.

"What perfection of duplicity!" repeated Lord Boileau, as he observed
what passed, and as Mr. Winyard, approaching Lord Glenmore, addressed
him in easy, familiar terms, making himself appear to be, as in all
similar cases, and _selon tous les règles depuis tous les temps,
l'ami de la maison_, and equally necessary to both parties. The whole
scene did not pass unobserved by Lord Albert, who recollected what
observations had been made before, by some of the same party, on Lady
Glenmore at the drawing-room; and he felt he despised those who could
thus lightly tamper with the honour of the man whose notice they
courted, whose society they affected to like, and to whose intimacy
they endeavoured to aspire. But it was a subject on which he could
only think. Miserably, our best friends are frequently precluded, from
circumstances, from being of the least use to us.

After a short interval, passed in visiting the different objects of
beauty and interest in the gardens of the Priory, the hour arrived for
assembling the guests under the marquees where the _déjeûner dinatoire_
was prepared; and Lord and Lady Glenmore, with their party, adjourned
thither. The Leinsengen, Baskerville, Boileau, and Lady De Chere, were
already placed when they arrived; but all made way for them, and in
the _mêlée_ of the moment Mr. Leslie Winyard succeeded in securing his
post by the side of Lady Glenmore. After the first clamour of voices
had subsided, every one spoke to his neighbour only; and Mr. Leslie
Winyard availed himself of this opportunity to engross Lady Glenmore's
attention in every possible way. Lady Boileau, who was seated opposite
and rather _desœuvré_, amused herself by remarking every glance and
every little attention which Mr. Winyard addressed to Lady Glenmore;
and whispered to the Comtesse Leinsengen, "_Ça va grand train_,"
indicating by a look those of whom she spoke.

"O dat is always de way in dis country: either _des dragonnes de
vertu_, or else, _tête baissé_, you give de _grand scandale_. 'Tis
noting new; 'tis _à votre ordinaire. Ça fait pitié_, but it cannot be
help. _Toujours des grandes passions_, which end in de run away, de
food for de newspapers; and den _sauve qui peut_, and de woman is left
to sink or swim, _que vous êtes maladroites, vous autres Angloises_."

"Pardon me, dear comtesse," said Lord Gascoigne, joining in the
conversation, and speaking in the tone of satire with which he
sometimes lashed the foibles of the day, "pardon me, comtesse, not
always: there are many who, a little while after their _écarté_, have
retired from the scene in order to return to it with a fresh title
and fresh fame. It only depends upon the rank that is held by the
_préféré_. It is true, were he as handsome as Adonis, and as seducing
as Love himself, that would be no excuse; but if he has wealth, power,
title, the affair passes through a regular process of _sous entendu_,
and then all is smooth again, _et on passe à des nouvelles amours_."

"Very true," rejoined the Comtesse Leinsengen sharply; "and so much for
your boasted London _morale_."

"Pray, however, remember, comtesse, that London is not England, nor
England London; although, in regard to foreign capitals, that inference
might once have held good, and Paris could be justly said to be all
France. But our system of politics, as well as of private life, is one
which no foreigner ever did or ever will understand."

The Comtesse Leinsengen gave her accustomed shrug, turned away before
Lord Gascoigne had finished speaking, and the whole party soon after
broke up, the ladies retiring into the house to change their dress and
prepare for the ball.

The dancing was already begun when Lady Glenmore's party entered the
ball-room. The whole glitter of the beautiful scene, the perfume
exhaled from the plants, which floated through the freshness of the
country air, all conspired to take the senses captive; and never did
Lady Glenmore look more brilliant, or appear in more joyous spirits.
There was an ingenuousness about her which enchanted even those
who had least of it themselves, and who thought that perfection of
manners consisted only in the refinement of art, to the exclusion of
all natural feeling. As she was led away to the dance by Mr. Leslie
Winyard, Lord Glenmore's eyes followed her, beaming with love and
admiration.

"_Elle est ravissante_," said Lady Tenderden.

Lord Glenmore evinced his assent to the truth of this remark by a
smile, which Lady Tenderden was willing that those around should
consider directed to herself; and she continued to keep Lord Glenmore
in conversation for some time, to improve an opinion, which it was
always her aim to maintain, of her possessing an influence over
him. Nor was the powerful charm of the scene, and the circumstances
attendant upon it, experienced alone by Lady Glenmore. Lady Hamlet
Vernon, in her turn, also acknowledged their influence. The
consciousness of the presence of the object of her love, and the
unalloyed confidence of the continuance of that enjoyment throughout
the evening, gave to her beauty an air of triumph and of joy, which,
had it sprung from an honest, innocent source, instead of being founded
on intrigue and artifice, would have possessed a power and a charm
which, as it was, her beauty missed. As she walked up the ball-room,
leaning on Lord Albert's arm, a crowd intervened between them and the
dancers; for every body had clustered together in one spot, attracted
by some object which was hid from those at a distance.

Lord Albert heard on all sides exclamations of admiration on the beauty
and the grace of some person who was at this moment dancing. Their
curiosity was excited, and they pressed the more eagerly onwards; till,
arriving suddenly at an opening in the circle formed round the dancers,
Lord Albert perceived Lady Adeline Seymour immediately opposite to
him,--the attraction of all eyes, the object of the concentrated
admiration of the whole room. She was dancing with Mr. Foley;--dancing,
not with the affectation of drawling over the floor as though she were
doing penance, but with airiness and elasticity of spirit, tempered by
grace and feminine delicacy. Lady Adeline was not at first conscious
of his presence; while, as he stood rooted to the spot, he had leisure
to gaze upon her in mingled surprise and agitation before she perceived
him: but when she did, her eyes for a moment rested on his, with an
expression which, brief as the moment was, shook his very frame. It was
an agonized look of love and reproach; for not only did she see one
whom she now was forced to believe a rival in his affections leaning
fondly on Lord Albert's arm, but in the bosom of that rival the very
myrtle sprig which Lord Albert had taken from her at the drawing-room
with such seeming devotion. She identified it too well as being the
same; for in her bitterest agony, when she plucked it on the morning
of the Court, she had told over every leaf and every flower; and
connecting each of them with some allusion to past days, and again
feeling it to be the medium of a returning act of fondness, how could
_she_ forget, or mistake it for any other myrtle? As Lady Adeline now
beheld this corroborating evidence of Lord Albert's cruelty and deceit,
the colour glowed and faded in rapid alternation on her cheek; she
seemed lost in thought; her footsteps became unsteady, and ready to
sink under her; and it was a moment or two before Mr. Foley, holding
her hand, could succeed in drawing her attention. She appeared to gaze
at him like one whose senses had fled: then, as if making an effort to
recal them, she stepped forward to continue the dance: but the buoyancy
of her motion was gone; her late gossamer footstep seemed exchanged for
one of lead; her eyes sought the ground; and when it was her turn to go
back to her place, she remained in the middle of the circle till again
rendered conscious of her mistake by the other parties advancing.

In this pause of the dance Lady Adeline had an opportunity of
recovering her presence of mind; and, calling to her aid the just
indignation which Lord Albert's conduct inspired, she felt herself
armed against the tenderer feelings; and by what she construed his
treachery and desertion, she was enabled to steel her heart to every
soft emotion, and not afford greater triumph to her rival, or greater
gratification to his self-love, by betraying any marks of sensibility.
This idea, together with what she owed her mother, whose feelings she
well knew would be deeply wounded if through weakness she made any
public disclosure of her suffering, enabled Lady Adeline to rally her
spirits sufficiently to go through her painful part with apparent ease
and indifference; and so completely did she obtain the mastery over
herself, that perhaps no one, save Lady Hamlet Vernon, was conscious of
the workings of that breast, the peace of which she was perfidiously
destroying. Lord Albert even was a stranger to what she endured; for,
blind to the errors of his own conduct, he of course became blinded
to their consequence, and never attributed Lady Adeline's behaviour
towards him to the natural result of his own in respect to her. It is
ever thus:--we look not to our errors as the cause of the misfortunes
which befall us, and the pains and penalties to which we are doomed.

From the moment Lord Albert first beheld Mr. Foley dancing with Lady
Adeline, he had remained transfixed to the spot. And how can language
render by its slow process the thousand rapid feelings which gush
simultaneously from the heart, and seem to pass through the mind at the
same moment? Jealousy, indignation, scorn (though love in ambush was
concealed beneath these bitter passions), alternately distracted him.
The mother and daughter he alike accused of subtilty and subterfuge.
He recalled to mind Lady Dunmelraise's manner to him; her words
especially, and her expression, on the subject of the breakfast;
Adeline's feigned indifference to it, now contrasted with her actual
presence there, dancing with Mr. Foley. All these circumstances seemed
to confirm the fatal truth; and disappointed love and mortified
vanity, and a sense of having been deceived, juggled, contemned, were
struggling at one and the same moment for ascendancy in his bosom. In
this state of mind, the time, the place, the whole scene, save only
this one prominent feature of interest, were to him as though they
existed not. As the dance drew to a close, he asked himself what line
of conduct he should pursue. Should he speak to Lady Adeline in a
language of reproach? should he give utterance to his feelings in a few
brief words of overwhelming import? No, he would not; it was beneath
him. And if she _was_ unworthy, and had forgotten what was due to him
and to _herself_, _he_ would never forget what was due to _her_. Could
he address Adeline with calm indifference?--impossible!--his heart
would not second the deception.

While he stood thus lost in thought, like one bereft of sense, the
workings of his soul were not unheeded by her who leant on his arm
the while. She felt that this very instant was the critical point of
all her hopes, and she almost unconsciously pressed the arm on which
she rested closer to her breast. Her respiration was broken; her
eyes wandered in quick succession on Lord Albert and Lady Adeline
alternately; and though she dared not propose to move from the spot
where they stood, yet to remain there was torture. At last the dance,
which had appeared to her interminable, ended; and Lady Adeline passed
on with Mr. Foley, without taking any notice of Lord Albert whatever,
as though she saw him not.

Lady Hamlet once more felt that she could breathe again, when she no
longer beheld the object of her fears before her, and without any
mutual recognition of each other having passed between Lord Albert and
Lady Adeline. Fresh hopes revived in her breast. She now ventured to
address the former in a tone of tremulous gentleness.

"Shall we not walk about in the garden? it is very hot here." He
started, looking at her as a man awakening from a dream; and as he
suffered himself to be led whither she would, he continued to muse
in silence on all that had passed: then suddenly murmured, in a
half-broken sentence,

"I _will_ see Adeline; I will see her _to-morrow_." Lady Hamlet knew
too well from this what must be the purpose he was revolving, and the
fervency of his still remaining attachment for Lady Adeline. An icy
chill withered her heart as she thought of the possible result of
that interview, which the words that had involuntarily escaped him
too surely predicted. But deeply skilled in the human heart, she did
not attempt to say any thing to dissuade him at that moment from his
purpose, nor did she venture to make any allusion whatever to Lady
Adeline; for she was well aware that all interference would not only
be fruitless, but might hazard the very object nearest her heart.
Besides, Lord Albert had never suffered himself to pronounce Lady
Adeline's name, even when, in the many conversations which he had held
with Lady Hamlet Vernon, she had been covertly alluded to; neither had
Lady Hamlet Vernon dared openly to touch upon his attachment to Lady
Adeline, since their first interview after the visit at Restormel, when
in the fervency of her feelings, and the plenitude of her despair, she
said,

"Lady Adeline will never make you happy."

From the constrained and painful situation in which she now found
herself placed, when silence was scarcely to be borne, and yet to
break it was perilous, she was relieved by the approach of Mr. Spencer
Newcombe, Lord Raynham, and Lord Glenmore; and glad to arrest them by
way of saying something, asked if they had seen Lady Glenmore.

"Yes," replied Lord Raynham. "I left her some time ago enjoying that
most enviable amusement, which only demands strength of wind and limb,
and spares all the wear and tear of brains that graver cares demand.
I wish it were the fashion for men of my age to make _girouettes_ and
_pirouettes_, and cut _entrès_. Grown gentlemen _are_ taught to dance,
and I have long had serious thoughts of learning _incog._"

"I hope you will let your intimate friends at least enjoy your first
_début_," cried Mr. Spencer Newcombe. "But, after all, you know,
Raynham, that _girouettes_ and _pirouettes_ belong equally to the dance
of life as to the dance of the ball-room; and we are none of us quite
ignorant of these, though some of us make them more gracefully than
others."

Lord Raynham had a way of not hearing when it did not suit him to hear;
and having no impromptu _fait à loisir_ ready at that moment, by way of
reply, he passed on, apparently insensible to the sting, which he was
much better skilled in knowing how to inflict than how to receive.

"I think," said Lord Glenmore, "that at all events Georgina must have
had enough of that enviable amusement, as Raynham calls it, by this
time; and that if we do not go in quest of her, we shall not be
together at supper." So saying, he sought her first among the dancers;
but passed on, inquiring, as he went, if any one had seen her. Some
replied one thing, some another; and many answered in a pointed manner,
which, however, was unobserved by him, for it was contrary to Lord
Glenmore's nature to entertain a doubt of those whom he once loved and
esteemed. Being wearied of seeking Lady Glenmore, and concluding she
had gone to the refreshment-room, he sat down by Lady Tenderden, whose
vanity was always gratified in every opportunity of keeping up the
remembrance of a past juvenile gossip in the eyes of the world.

In the meanwhile, Lady Glenmore, who had been overcome by the heat of
the ball-room, had been easily prevailed upon to seek the refreshing
coolness of the terraces; and having walked about some time, entered
the conservatory, and sat down for a moment to inhale the perfume of
the flowers and plants, and to enjoy the tranquillity it afforded
from the noise and bustle of the dancers. Here Mr. Leslie Winyard
beguiled the hour, and interested Lady Glenmore by reciting various
passages from various poets, analogous to the spirit of the place, and
then passing from these to the theme of such feelings as the lines
he quoted were calculated to inspire. He dwelt with eloquence on the
imperfection and little refinement of all attachments of the present
day, expatiated on that homage which ought to be paid to woman, and
which, as he spoke, he seemed to imply was willingly paid by himself to
her.

There was an inebriating danger in this address, which Lady Glenmore
was too young and too pure to see; and she listened complacently
and unsuspectingly to the perilous flattery, forgetting how the
moments flew, and unconscious of the impropriety of her remaining so
long absent from the general circle, and in a place so remote from
observation. Nor was she aware of the appearance which might attach to
her, till a whisper fell on her ear, and, startling, made her arise
hastily from her seat. It proceeded from Lord Gascoigne and Lord
Baskerville, who stood behind some orange-trees.

"Basky," said the latter, arresting his companion by the arm, "we
are _de trop_ here," directing his attention to the spot where Lady
Glenmore and Mr. Leslie Winyard were.

"Upon my word," replied Lord Baskerville, "this is worth all the _fête_
put together."

"Hush!" said the latter distinctly; "let us be off: it is not fair."

Lady Glenmore looked round, but saw no one: it aroused her, however, to
a recollection of the length of time that she had been sitting there,
and moving forward on the instant, she said,

"We must return to the ball-room."

Mr. Leslie Winyard would willingly have detained her, but he felt that
it was injudicious to press her to remain when she seemed to have taken
alarm; and having himself heard the voices, which he believed to have
occasioned Lady Glenmore's sudden departure, he was conscious that some
curious intruders had witnessed the fact of his _tête-à-tête_; and he
consoled himself for its interruption with the idea that its fame would
soon be spread abroad, and in colours far more glowing than the reality.

When Lady Glenmore returned to the ball-room, she saw her husband in
the midst of Lady Tenderden's _coterie_, enjoying that easy flow of
spirits, which, tempered with elegance and refinement of fancy, marked
peculiarly the charm of his society. As she approached, he arose
and took her hand, and with an expression of pleasure drew her arm
through his, as though he had found all that he wanted to complete
his enjoyment of the pleasure of the scene. Lady Glenmore, too, seemed
delighted; while some of those who witnessed this meeting exchanged
significant looks, and whispered remarks upon the cunning duplicity of
the one, and the consummate _bonhommie_ of the duped.

"It is the best thing," said Lord Baskerville, "that I have seen this
many a day:" and by Lord Tonnerre, Lord Boileau, and the rest of that
knot of persons, Lady Glenmore was pronounced to be the cleverest woman
in the world, her husband the greatest fool, and Leslie Winyard the
most fortunate of men.

All this while Lord Albert had been close at Lady Hamlet Vernon's side,
mute, and apparently insensible to every thing around. Once only did
Lady Adeline pass before him; but he could not be deaf to the lavish
encomiums he heard repeated on all sides, of the beauty and the grace
of her who was to have been his own, but who was now lost to him, he
feared, for ever; and all these things, and the sad contrast of the
past and of the present, aggravated the bitterness of his soul.

The last glimpse he caught of her was on her leaving the Priory, when
she was leaning on the arm of Mr. Foley, accompanied by Lady Louisa
Blithewaite. Her spirits, wound up for some time to a factitious
spring, had given way at last, and she could no longer keep up
the deception. Languid, inanimate, almost unable to stand, she
thought that she had done all which Lady Dunmelraise could demand;
and, under the plea of excessive fatigue, she easily prevailed on
Lady Louisa Blithewaite not to await the end of the _fête_, but to
return to town. The general homage she had received, and the very
particular _dévouement_ of the Duke of Mercington, might, under other
circumstances, have been powerful stimulants to the vanity of any young
mind; but one absorbing passion is the best _natural_ preservative
against the follies of the world, and the heartlessness of vanity; for
the incense of flattery palls upon a heart that is deeply engaged, and
which scorns all praise that is not uttered by the lips of the one
object of its devotion.

Before Lady Adeline reached town, the morning light streaked the
horizon; and she felt that this rising of day, with its accompaniment
of vernal airs, and twittering birds, and sparkling dew-drops, and
all the gladness of an awakened creation, were but a mocking contrast
to the setting sun of her hopes, the mournful notes of sorrow which
rung in her ears, and the deadness of that affection which she had
once thought could suffer no diminution or decay. The chilling damp
of disappointed love clung around her heart and withered every hope,
rendering her wholly spiritless, and unable to converse; and when she
arrived at Lady Dunmelraise's door, she took a hasty leave of Lady
Louisa Blithewaite, and stealing as noiselessly as she could to her
apartment, she courted the silence of reflection, but not the calm of
sleep.




CHAPTER IX.

LOVERS' ERRORS.


Had Lord Albert D'Esterre been himself at the time, and not the victim
of contending passions, he would have left the _fête_ at Avington
Priory the moment he had seen Lady Adeline depart. As it was, he
remained; it cannot be supposed from any entertainment or delight that
he derived from the scene, but from that species of suffering which
renders _all_ scenes alike; and in the bitterness of his heart he even
affected a gaiety such as the poor maniac feels,

    "With moody madness laughing wild
     Amid severest woe."

How many hearts are there in similar situations, whose gangrene wounds
are festering at the core while the mask of pleasure is painted on the
face! But there are few persons in the world who know us sufficiently,
or think of us enough, to detect the assumed disguise; and thus the
wretched are numbered with the happy. Some few, however, there are,
who, mingling in this cheating crowd, have yet their hopes and hearts
anchored in a far different sphere, and pass through the infected mass,
themselves unspotted, like Milton's personification of Purity amid the
crew of Comus.

These, with deep commiseration of spirit, penetrate the paint and
varnish of deceptive pleasure, and, shuddering, see what waste they
make of life who never look beyond it--losing, for its shadow, the sum
and substance of true happiness. But _such as these_ were not to be
found in the circle in which Lord Albert moved. He had often, since
his _entrainement_ in that delusive scheme of existence in which he
was involved, exclaimed, "I was not made for this!" The nobler, truer
purposes of existence were still the inmates of his breast, but they
were under a spell which he had no power to break: they were dead
letter, and were in peril of becoming obsolete.

In this state of moral danger, had he confided to Lord Glenmore's ear
the contradictory feelings by which he was alternately swayed, in
him Lord Albert would have found a true friend; for he was not one
of the many who pass by exultingly, in the ride, or indifference, or
selfishness of their nature, and say, "You, too, are happy," careless
of the reality, so long as the sunshine of their own amusement is not
darkened by the sorrow they see another wear. No: Lord Glenmore would
have not only commiserated, but counselled; not only counselled, but
aided. Alas! we may suspect, that when we shrink from confiding our
sorrows to a friend whom we know to be good and true, we are ourselves
under some fatal delusion.

Lord Albert sought not to unbosom himself to Lord Glenmore, from a
latent feeling that he was himself in error; and he had not had,
for many a day, the courage, or rather the virtue, to probe his own
conduct, but suffered the blindness of self-deception to gather like
a cataract over his mental vision; he acted under the consciousness
that he was to blame, yet without sufficient energy to attempt to
dispel the film, and look on things as they really were. It may seem
matter of surprise that Lord Glenmore, who lacked not penetration, had
not openly spoken to his friend on the subject of his engagement with
Lady Adeline: but while Lord Glenmore was happy himself, in that deep
sense of the word in which it most imports us to be happy, the mazes
of entanglement which gather around those who swerve from the path of
rectitude entered not into his imagination. He had always pursued a
straight-forward path, and truth and sincerity had given him a clue to
pass through life without entering on any of those tortuous ways, such
as now distracted his unhappy friend.

This clear moral light of action rendered him, in the present instance,
blind to the conduct of Lord Albert; and though the rumour was
prevalent amongst the circle in which they lived, that his engagement
with Lady Adeline was at an end, yet it had not reached Lord Glenmore's
ear; and even had it done so, perhaps, from ignorance of Lady Adeline's
merits, he might have thought that his friend's affections would be
better bestowed elsewhere; but, at all events, he would have felt, that
to mention the subject, while Lord Albert had made no allusion to it
himself, would have been an indelicacy on his part.

Thus was the former, from his own want of confidence, deprived of the
only counsellor who might, by a word, have dispelled the mist of error
which surrounded him; and by assisting Lord Albert to recover his
self-esteem, have restored him to a happiness which was now eluding his
grasp, if it had not already done so. Experience, however, must be
bought. There is an ordeal to be passed through by every one. Happy are
those who are purified seven times in the fire, and come forth humbled
and ameliorated!

However much Lord Albert's sufferings might have been unnoticed by the
general eye, there was one who read his soul's secret but too plainly.
Lady Hamlet Vernon saw through the veil of the false gaiety and forced
spirits which he assumed; and again and again felt, with an impassioned
woman's feelings, that the hour was come which was to decide her fate.

On the night, or rather morning, when the festivities of Avington
Park were ended--when the last lingering footsteps of the votaries
of pleasure passed away, satiated but not satisfied with the very
continuance of that diversion which for ever demands fresh food to feed
its sickly appetite, although it palls upon the aliment it craves--Lord
Albert could no longer drown his senses in the hum and glitter of the
gay crowd; and having handed Lady Hamlet Vernon to her carriage, sought
his own. And there once more alone, with a perfect abstraction of mind
he threw himself back, and, covering his face with his hands, shuddered
at the broad blue light of day, which seemed, in its pure serenity, to
mock the dark turbulence of his stormy thoughts; but he could not shut
out the beam of conscience, before whose searching ray the light and
darkness are both alike.

His pillow brought no repose, and he felt glad when the hour came
which called him to attend the routine of his official situation.
Distasteful as the occupation was become, harassed and preoccupied as
were his thoughts, he went through the duties it imposed with his usual
precision and power; and found, what every one will find, that duties,
however dry, when they are strictly fulfilled bring a palliative
to suffering, and act as correctives of evil. It must be allowed,
however, that it is a great prerogative which men enjoy over women, in
experiencing, from the very nature of the employments which generally
devolve on them, a relief that strengthens and invigorates, while those
of women bear them invariably back to the very source and centre of
their sorrows, and awaken all the enfeebling tenderness of the heart.
But neither should this create a spirit of repining. Doubtless, every
one who seeks for strength where alone it can be found will not seek
in vain; and the feeble may become strong when they place their trust
aright.

Lord Albert D'Esterre, having finished the business of the day, was
enabled with more calmness to meet the pain which he expected would
attend his visit in South Audley-street, whither he went to seek an
explanation from Lady Dunmelraise and Lady Adeline. As he crossed
Piccadilly from St. James's, with the intention of avoiding the throng
of Hyde Park, and as he was turning into a street leading more directly
to the point whither he was going, Lady Hamlet Vernon's carriage passed
him. She looked out of the window, at the same time kissing her hand
as though she wished him to stop; but returning her salute, he passed
on. Still there was something peculiar in her expression which did not
escape his observation. It spoke a triumph, of which, had he known the
cause, it would have proved an antidote to the misery that was in store
for him; for in that case he would, under every circumstance, have
persevered in his determination of obtaining an explanation from Lady
Adeline in person.

When arrived at the well-known door of Lady Dunmelraise, he waited with
impatience for its opening, but no one came. He desired his servant to
knock again; and looking up, he perceived the windows were open, and
maid-servants passing to and fro in the rooms with an air of unusual
bustle, which made him shudder, although he knew not why. At the
same moment, the porter opened the door, and informed him that Lady
Dunmelraise and Lady Adeline had left town a few hours before. He was
for a minute mute with astonishment.--"Left town!" he exclaimed; "for
how long?"

"I really do not know, my lord."

"When do you expect their return?"

"Not this year," was the reply: "at least, we have received no orders
to lead us to suppose my lady is coming back; but, on the contrary, we
have directions to take down the furniture."

"This is unaccountable!" ejaculated Lord Albert, with a movement of
mingled indignation and grief. "Where is Lady Dunmelraise gone?" he
asked, after another pause.

"To Dunmelraise, I believe, my lord."

Lord Albert continued to sit on his horse mechanically for some
minutes, as if wholly unable to collect his thoughts, or to believe
the truth of what the servant said. Again and again he asked the
same questions, and invariably received the same answers, till there
was no longer any doubt of the fact; and then in broken sentences
he said, unconscious that he spoke aloud,--"It is too true, too
evident--unnecessary!--unworthy!"

"My lord?" said his groom, thinking he addressed him.

"Nothing, James, nothing," he said, starting from his reverie; and
suffering his horse to choose its own direction, he allowed the reins
to lie heedlessly on its neck; and then, again, actuated by a change of
impulse, he urged it to its speed, dashing rapidly through the streets;
when some of his acquaintance, who saw him as he passed, observed,
"D'Esterre is certainly quite mad; I always thought so." And thus he
continued his way homeward, now riding furiously, now creeping along,
as the wayward mood of the moment directed, till he found himself at
his own door; and then, flinging himself from his horse, he rushed to
his apartment, forbidding all interruption. Lord Albert's servants,
who were exceedingly attached to him, looked aghast at his altered
demeanour, and marvelled what had befallen their master.

No sooner was he alone, than he paced the room in all directions,
uttering broken sentences of, "Gone--gone--not to return!--without
one word of farewell!"--Then he cast himself first into one chair,
then into another; then arose abruptly, and striking his forehead,
cried, "It is so. The die is cast, and all is over. But I will write
to Lady Dunmelraise.--No; rather I will go myself to her. I will
upbraid her duplicity, and shame Adeline for this unworthy conduct."
Then again, sinking into a calmer mood, but one of deeper anguish,
he said, "It is too plain, it is too evident. Why should I seek
that which I know already? No, no," he added, with a bitter smile,
"Adeline shall not have it in her power to say that I was the first
to break our engagement. Lady Dunmelraise shall not avail herself
of any precipitation on my part, to dissolve a tie which she wishes
broken, but knows not how to break. Adeline shall herself give me my
dismissal; for _it is_ Adeline who has coldly, cruelly, and shamelessly
cast me off." Here he felt a check. There was a sort of echo that gave
back the sentence in mockery to his ear. "Adeline has cast _me_ off,"
seemed repeated in bitter derision. There are words and circumstances
which occur in the life of every one, when something more than the
usual meaning of the one, or the common import of the other, appears
to attach a consequence to them beyond their own individual value. So
strongly did this feeling come over Lord Albert at the present moment,
as he referred all blame to Lady Adeline, that a sudden revulsion
of sensation rendered his mind a chaos. Still his unwillingness to
acknowledge himself in fault made him recall every trivial occurrence
which could confirm his jealous doubts, and dwell on these till he
again persuaded himself that he was the innocent and aggrieved person.

Mastered by this false impression, he determined to remain silent, and
await his expected dismissal. "Then," he said, "then will be the time
for me to speak of my wrongs." His mind was turbulent and gloomy all
that day; but when the evening came, he habitually sought the circle
in which he had been too much accustomed of late to pass his time, and
which had become necessary to him. As Lady Tilney had a _soirée_, he
drove to her house; and in this routine of what is termed pleasure he
courted and found that torpor of reflection which it is its peculiar
and baneful property to produce.

Lady Hamlet Vernon, who had heard from Mr. Foley of Lady Dunmelraise's
sudden departure, and who felt like one snatched from the perilous
brink of an abyss on receiving the intelligence, was now once more
enabled to put forth all her fascinations; and on that evening devoted
herself, with successful ardour, to the task of engaging Lord Albert's
attention, and diverting his mind from painful retrospection. With all
a woman's wiles, she suited her discourse to his taste; and, without
too much or too little display, brought her varied talents into view,
not as though they were her _own_, but merely the reflection caught
from Lord Albert's; existing but _through_ him and _for_ him; by him
to be fostered and improved, or by him to be crushed and dissolved, at
pleasure.

Who but a woman can enter into this refinement of enchantment? Who
but a woman can glory in being a slave? The effect Lady Hamlet Vernon
produced on Lord Albert this evening was that of a lulling spell; an
influence which she always possessed in greater degree, in proportion
to the racking doubts and anxieties under which he laboured, and which
rendered him the easier prey to her seducing arts. When he parted from
her, accordingly, on that evening, he felt grateful for the solace
which her friendship and devotion seemed invariably to afford. False
and unstable as was its basis, he leant on it with mistaken confidence;
for he had plunged into the deceptive sea of error, and was doomed
to be the sport of every incidental circumstance that floated on the
surface of his affections.

On the following morning, his cruel, unjust opinions of Lady
Dunmelraise and her daughter were confirmed, upon reading in the
newspapers an announcement of Lady Dunmelraise's having left town,
accompanied by a remark, in the usual language of similar information,
that it was understood the lovely Lady Adeline was soon to be led to
the hymeneal altar by Mr. George Foley. He cast down the paper with a
feeling of sickness at his heart, which again gave way to a sense of
deep injury; and then once more was renewed the determination to clear
up the question by a direct application to Lady Dunmelraise: but the
false pride of wounded feelings, offended honour, indignation at being
deceived, and all the minor concomitants of self-love, brought back
the tide of error which swept his thoughts into another channel, and
with the sullen gloom of despair he finally said, "No; the issue of
this strife must soon come of itself: let it come: it shall neither be
retarded nor hastened by me."

While Lord Albert was thus suffering the penalty of his own mistaken,
erring conduct, Lady Adeline's sufferings had not been less painfully
acute; with this only difference, that self-reproach had never torn
her breast; and agonizing as were her feelings on the morning when
she returned from Avington Priory, they were enviable in comparison
with those which racked his heart. Lady Dunmelraise had given orders,
the previous evening, that her daughter should not be disturbed on
the following day; concluding that the fatigue of the _fête_ would be
to her doubly trying, and that she would require a long and complete
rest. She was much surprised, therefore, when she came to breakfast, to
find Lady Adeline awaiting her. Her countenance and air at once told
a melancholy truth to Lady Dunmelraise; and she felt not only that
rest had been a stranger to her, but that some more decided event, and
more painful than any which had yet befallen her, must have occurred,
to have, in so brief a space, effected such ravages on her youth and
bloom. Nor did she remain long in ignorance of this so sudden change;
for Lady Adeline, meeting her mother's embrace, with many convulsive
sobs breathed out her entreaty to be taken immediately from London,
and to be spared her being called upon to witness any more of those
agonizing scenes, such as she had been exposed to at Avington Priory.

"I have done enough, I have done enough, dearest mamma," she exclaimed,
"to show Albert an indifference which I never can really feel towards
him; and you will not, I am sure, condemn your poor child to any more
similar trials." She then detailed to Lady Dunmelraise the particulars
of the last night's occurrences, who saw too plainly, and shuddered as
she saw, that this strife of suppressed feeling had shaken the frame of
her child, and not only blighted her happiness, but endangered her very
existence.

"My sweet Adeline," said Lady Dunmelraise with the tenderest
earnestness, "would that I could as easily take all sorrow from you as
I can now comply with this your request! You shall no longer endure a
protracted stay here: we will leave town directly."

Lady Adeline knew her mother's heart, and doubted not of her
acquiescence in her wishes; but there was a manner of feeling _with_
her at the moment, which was grateful to her wounded heart beyond the
mere act of compliance; and as she wept on her mother's shoulder, she
said,

"I am an unthankful being to feel unhappy when I have such a parent."
Lady Dunmelraise kissed away her tears; and having done all in her
power to soothe, left her with the secret intention to arrange their
immediate departure. Scarcely was Lady Adeline alone, than she looked
fearfully around, as though the very precincts of the room upbraided
her for going away, and as though she had voluntarily sought to take a
step which was for ever to part her from Lord Albert.

An icy coldness clung round her heart, as she gazed again and again at
the walls of the apartment, and in every article of their decoration
recognized some trace of him she loved. She murmured inwardly, "Even
where his shadow fell, the senseless wall recalls all my grief; for
though it left no trace upon the spot on which it passed, what can
efface the reflection of his image from my heart?

"Can it be," she went on to say, "that so short a time ago I entered
this house, elated with hope and delight at the idea of meeting him?
can it be that he should have appeared inspired with the same feelings
as myself, and then, without any reason, so cruelly, so heartlessly
desert me? I think I could have better borne this sorrow, had he only
confided in me as a friend. Yes, had he but told me the truth, I might
have mourned in secret; but I never should have wept for him as I do
now in bitterness of heart, to think that I have so loved an object
unworthy of my esteem."

Alas! when we are in sorrow, we fancy any other grief would be easier
endured than that which weighs us down; but we judge erroneously.
Sorrows spring not out of the ground; and it is knowing how to
suffer the scourge under which we smart that can alone bring us any
alleviation. There are few persons, so young as Lady Adeline, with
feelings as finely strung, who are so well prepared to meet with trial;
yet still poor human nature is in its best estate a mart for sorrows;
and those are happiest who soonest learn to barter the bright, delusive
hopes of youth for the sober, subdued views of real life, which,
without producing a distaste for this world's enjoyments, despoil them
of that vivid colouring which cannot last, and detaches them from
considering it as their abiding place.

Such was the lesson now taught to Lady Adeline, as she was called, with
unexpected haste, to quit South Audley-street; and she cast a last
hurried glance at the chair where he had sat, who was still her heart's
idol, at the carpet on which he had trod, the book he had opened, and,
lastly, the picture, the image dearer than all except himself, which
she now left for the first and last time, as no longer worthy to be her
companion. Notwithstanding the abruptness with which she was snatched
from these melancholy contemplations, and the revulsion of feelings
which her sudden farewell to these cherished objects occasioned,
Lady Adeline, after a few hours' reflection, acknowledged that the
promptness of Lady Dunmelraise's decision had been made in kindness,
and that the blow which was to sever her from him she most loved, if it
were inevitable, were best to fall suddenly.




CHAPTER X.

AN AWKWARD DILEMMA.


The _fête_ at Avington Priory afforded a theme of conversation, if
such a term is not inapplicable to such a subject, of much longer
duration than was usual; for in the existence of those who were actors
in the scene, or participators in its pleasures, one folly generally
succeeded another so quickly as to chase away all remembrance of its
immediate predecessor. Perhaps, too, in this instance, more interest
was experienced in the discussion of the entertainment, from the zest
which some signal _esclandres_ gave to it, and which were generally
whispered about; particularly that in which Lady Glenmore's and Mr.
Leslie Winyard's names were involved.

Of this report, Lord Baskerville and Lord Gascoigne were the active
propagators; and which, corroborated by the condemning facts they
themselves had witnessed, led those who listened to the conclusion
that the matter was _une affaire decidée_. The only question then was,
whether it was well or ill arranged; for in all things the creed of
these parties taught them to estimate the _manner_ of an action without
any reference to its morality. Opinions were given respecting the good
or bad taste of the thing; and speculation ran high how Glenmore would
take it. However far from the truth, or unjust, these conclusions and
opinions might in reality be, it cannot be denied that Lady Glenmore
had in some measure afforded subject of conversation to the licentious
and censorious tongues of these traducers, by permitting the very
marked and exclusive attentions of Mr. Leslie Winyard in society; and,
in doing so, justified an apprehension which the most candid and the
most kind observer (if any such had been there as witness) could not
but feel, that she must inevitably fall a victim to a man of Leslie
Winyard's character, unless some powerful hand snatched her from the
peril.

In the example of Lady Glenmore's present danger, the mischiefs arising
out of the system of the society in which she lived are painfully
apparent; and although they have more than once been dwelt upon, yet,
with the object of unmasking a disguised evil, they cannot be too
frequently alluded to or minutely detailed. Nor can the observation
be too often repeated, that such dangers must unavoidably accrue to
the young and inexperienced while receiving none of those salutary
checks which are afforded them in a society differently organized, and
where the ties of families, and the counsel and protection of sincere
friends, are _not_ sacrificed to the laws and rules of exclusive
fashion.

Lady Glenmore's absence, it might almost be called alienation, from
Lord and Lady Melcombe and the bosom of her own family, had been so
gradual as scarcely to be perceptible. Had it been otherwise, she
would have recoiled from the idea, and her excellent heart would have
sufficed to guard her from so unnatural a fault; but the evil grew out
of the circumstances in which she was placed, and increased without any
appearance which could awaken a suspicion of its real tendency. She did
not go to-day to Lady Melcombe, because Lady Tenderden, or Lady Tilney,
or some other of her friends, had prevented her at the very moment she
was stepping into her carriage; but she would go to-morrow: and when
to-morrow came, fatigued with the ball or the assembly of the preceding
evening, she did not rise till at so late an hour, that Lady Melcombe
would be out, and it was in vain for her to go. When the evening in
its turn came round, then some ceremonious diplomatic dinner, followed
by the _soirées_ of the different members of her _coterie_, equally
precluded her from fulfilling this duty.

Thus one day passed on after another, and the rare and short visit to
her parents, when it was paid, afforded no real communion of heart
or thought. Yet all this happened not wilfully, not in positive
indifference, or forgetfulness of natural affection, but arose, as it
were, unavoidably, out of the life she led. Let it not excite surprise
that this alienation had been productive of no alarm in the tender and
affectionate hearts of Lord and Lady Melcombe. They, indeed, saw less
of their daughter than they wished; but though they sometimes sighed
over the "angel visits, few and far between," of their estranged child,
still, in the indulgent fondness of their hearts, perhaps too in a
mistaken pride, they found an excuse for her constantly living in a
round of dissipation, partly from the pomp and circumstance attendant
on the public situation which her husband held, and partly from
thinking it natural that one so young, and gifted with external graces,
should indulge in the pleasures that courted her on all sides.

Another cause, too, existed, to render their separation an apparent
consequence of her marriage. Lord and Lady Melcombe had not lived at
any time on terms of intimacy with that circle which now exclusively
formed their daughter's and Lord Glenmore's society; and a further
barrier by this means stood between their meeting; but it was one
which, if natural feelings had been allowed their proper influence,
and had any advance been made to Lord and Lady Melcombe, on the part
of those persons, towards their acquaintance, might easily have been
removed.

In this case, for their daughter's sake, they would readily have met
any advance, and in order to do so, have stepped out of their own
habitual line of society; a society founded on the dignified principles
of high rank, and the rational grounds of real social happiness: but
they were the last persons to court an intimacy where a mutual desire
was not expressed for its formation; and the question, however painful
as it affected their natural intercourse with their child, was not,
however, one which gave rise to any seriously uneasy feelings. When
they did see her, they saw her so fondly attached to her husband, and
so happy, what could they fear for her? It would almost have seemed
like a selfish apprehension, to have indulged any doubts regarding her
future welfare.

Their own course through life had been one perpetual gleam of
sunshine, a circumstance which is apt to render us more blind to
the possibility of evil, than when we have been exercised in the
school of adversity; that school by which we are alone perfected, and
without whose salutary discipline the false security is indulged, that
"_to-morrow will be as to-day, and even more abundant_," and we dread
no check to our earthly career.

How fearful is this species of happiness, which, resting on itself,
forgets the hand by which it is alone upheld! Could Lord and Lady
Melcombe have seen through this delusion--could they have guessed that
their child stood at the moral point where the two paths separate
which lead to virtue or to vice, and where the traveller in the road
of life, according as he makes his choice, will be admitted in the
end to misery or happiness--they would have performed their duty as
parents unhesitatingly; they would have pointed out to their child the
excellence of the one course, and have warned her of the inevitable
ruin and degradation attendant on the other. As to the current reports
of the day, they were the last to hear them, as is usually the case
with those most concerned; and in this respect Lord Glenmore was
removed still further from a knowledge of the truth. Lady Glenmore,
deprived of her natural and true guides, surrounded by persons whose
lives were, generally speaking, characterized by the same errors,
on the brink of which she now hung, and who, if they looked on such
conduct as error, held it in a very venial light even when detected,
and as nothing, if it evaded open discovery, had little chance of
receiving any counsel in time to save her.

Speaking thus of Lady Glenmore, it must not be supposed that she viewed
her own conduct and career in its true light, or that she erred from
any determination to err, or even from being led away by any impulse of
passion; far from it. The innocence of her nature, her domestic habits
and education, as well as her attachment to her husband, had in the
first instance rendered her present mode of life distasteful. But it
is the very property of the subtle poison of that atmosphere in which
she lived and breathed to pollute the healthful springs of being, till
the moral taste becomes less and less acute, and is at length wholly
corrupted, leaving the mind totally unable to discriminate between
right and wrong.

Although, with the young men who lived in the same society, the event
of the downfall of her reputation was looked upon as a thing of
course, and hailed, in their licentiousness of spirit, as a matter of
congratulation, since it would level another victim to their standard,
still there were others of the _coterie_, who, from motives of policy,
were anxious that no further _esclandre_ should take place, than
that which had already arisen on the subject, to call forth the loud
reprehension of a public whom they at once feared and despised, and
whose opinions, though they set them at defiance, they in reality
wished not to brave unnecessarily: for in the instance of Lady
Glenmore, the destruction of so much happiness as was supposed to have
centred in her union would be likely to create proportionate abhorrence
and condemnation of a system of society which had been the occasion of
it, and lead to a sifting and exposure of the principle and motives on
which that system was based.

Lady Tilney was the first person whose acuteness and vigilance descried
the danger; and was impelled to attempt an arrangement of the business,
as well from her general love of managing every body and every thing,
as from the more weighty reason attached to it. Being perfectly aware
of Lady Glenmore's character, she dreaded lest an affair which, in
the hands of a woman of tact, might have been managed without any
_éclat_, would with her be precipitated to a point which must end in
an exposure. She felt, however, that to speak to Lady Glenmore openly
would be to commit herself with a person whose want of discretion was
the chief ground of her apprehensions respecting her; and therefore,
after much reflection, she determined to seek the assistance of Lady
Tenderden in the business, and employ her in its management, as being
more intimate with the parties than she herself was.

It was not the first time that Lady Tilney had availed herself of an
intermediate hand to work out a favourite undertaking. With this view,
some ten days after the _fête_ at Avington Priory, and when the whole
affair was openly spoken of throughout their circle, Lady Tilney sought
an opportunity of communicating her views to Lady Tenderden; and having
denied herself to every one else, they were soon in deep conference in
the _boudoir_.

"Dear Lady Tenderden," said the former, addressing her, "I am sure that
I may speak to you in confidence on a subject in which you will feel
an equal if not greater interest than myself: I allude to our _élève_,
_la petite_ Georgina. This is a very silly affair of hers with Leslie
Winyard, and is going too far: don't you think so?" Lady Tenderden
gave no direct answer.

"Surely you must allow that she is not the _sort_ of person to risk any
hazards, or to manage this kind of affair well or with prudence. If
allowed to go on by herself, she will run headlong down the precipice,
and no earthly power can save her. Besides, it would be such a terrible
thing _for us_, if there was any public scandal to ensue. Consider, my
dear Lady Tenderden, we should all incur some portion of blame, and
_she_ would be pitied; while we should have all those persons whom we
have banished without the pale of our society raving against _us_, and
our system, as though it were a _lazaretto_ in which all the plagues of
Egypt were assembled. Now, though _we_ know how false this is, still we
ought to provide against it."

Lady Tenderden nodded assent as Lady Tilney went on:--"_You_ agree with
me, I am sure; for the curious and the disappointed will not judge
_coolly_, and we must try to shelter ourselves from their imputations,
however groundless. We ought to move on in a sphere out of the general
nature of things; but, in order to do this _impunément_, it is
necessary to be vigilant and prudent; and I assure you I am never off
the watch."

"_Peut-être_; but den _how_ would you do in this instance?"

"Ah! there lies the delicacy; in that _how_ consists the difficulty
of the business; for you know, as to _la petite personne_ herself, we
cannot with any safety _compromettez_ ourselves by speaking to her on
this subject. She is one of those innocent persons who would, I am
sure, either start off at the bare mention of any _liaison_, and would
make a great fuss, and a scene which might be very unpleasant to us
all in a thousand ways; or else she might give _tête baissé_ into the
thing, so much the more from being warned against it, as your meek
people always do; and, though not discreet, she has cunning enough
to keep it strictly secret till the moment when she steps into the
carriage which is to take her from her disconsolate husband."

"_Peut-être_," was again Lady Tenderden's brief reply.

Lady Tilney proceeded. "Now, I think there is one, and only one, way in
which it can be managed; and your assistance will be vitally important
for its success."

"Oh _de graces_! do not involve me in any of dese troublesome _rôles_:
I am not at all de _personne_ to play dem well; and _l'inconduite de la
petite en question_ makes me quite _frissonné_ to think of any thing
of the kind."

"Oh! but, my dear Lady Tenderden, for Glenmore's sake, you know, for
all our sakes, you will not let this affair terminate as it must do if
something is not done to put it on a right footing? You will not surely
let the _scandale_ of such a common-place _dénouement_ attach to our
society, as the infallible issue of the affair must cause, unless we
attempt to save appearances, and settle the _marche du jeu_ in _better
taste_ at least?"

Lady Tenderden's countenance relaxed, as if she was pleased at the
idea of holding an influence over Lord Glenmore; and Lady Tilney was
satisfied that she had done wisely in condescending to flatter her
_amour-propre_, by confessing herself secondary in influence; a point
which she was never very willing to yield: but she felt it was the
surest way of securing Lady Tenderden's co-operation, and proceeded to
say,

"Now listen, I entreat you, to what I have to propose; and if you do
not approve my idea, then suggest something better. The only thing
that remains to be done, in my opinion, then," continued Lady Tilney,
"is to get Georgina out of England. You know Glenmore cannot move; but
that is no reason why _she_ may not be absent for a few months. The
advantage of your company, her health, a thousand excuses may be found:
and if she is not as deeply involved as we suspect with Winyard, _this_
will break off the affair; while, if she is, absence, and distance, and
the chances of time and place, _que sais-je enfin_----a million things
may turn away the tide of observation from _us_: at all events, the
_éclat_ will be less offensive abroad than at home. Now, could you not
propose to her a little tour to Spa, or _Les Eaux de Barèges_, when the
season comes round for leaving London?"

Lady Tenderden seemed half inclined to acquiesce, but, like most people
who make sudden changes of opinion, she did not know exactly how to
give as ready an assent as she was willing in her heart to do; while,
at the same time, there was a little demur at the idea of being made
the tool of Lady Tilney, as well as of being mixed up in an affair in
which, if it ended wrong, she would regret to have been implicated.

Lady Tilney's flattery and persuasive reasonings, however, as was
generally the case when she had a favourite point to carry, prevailed;
and the conversation ended with an arrangement, that Lady Tenderden
should, in the course of a few days, open the subject to Lady
Glenmore, and put it _en train_.

Although the solicitude of the polite Lady Tilney for the fate of her
young _élève_ might have been premature as to the precise degree of her
_liaison_ with Mr. Leslie Winyard, still, if it had been entertained
on a better principle than that of mere expediency, it would have
been amiable and justifiable; for when a married woman's name is once
connected with that of any man in particular, there is an immediate
taint on her character, which, while it is degrading to herself,
attaches to her husband the character of dupe, or something worse, and
affords an example to others, productive of almost as much evil as
would accrue from actual guilt.

There are very few women on whom this stain is cast, who could, like
the youthful Lady Glenmore, plead perfect innocence of intention; but
she had been, almost at the outset of her marriage, thrown alone in
the midst of the most dangerous class of the most dangerous society
of London. She had not certainly to complain that Lord Glenmore had
wilfully deserted or neglected her: his absence was a necessary
consequence of the duties he had taken upon himself in his public
career.

While, however, she acknowledged this, she could not but feel and mourn
over his absence with childish simplicity of tenderness: and when at
last, partly from necessity, and partly from the various arts used
to wean her from this innocent love, she felt, as it was natural she
should feel, considering that no very strong principle of religion had
been instilled into her mind, or given stability to her character, that
there could be no impropriety in having recourse to the pleasures and
pursuits of fashion--pleasures which pertained to her situation, and
were not only sanctioned, but encouraged, by her husband--still, in
doing this, it was not in her nature to aspire to any leading part, or
to take any particular station, in the circle in which she moved. Had
it been so,--had she been, in short, more worldly,--her conduct would
have been more measured, more under the control of appearances; and
though she would not have had so much real virtue, she would better
have known how to preserve its semblance. But as it was, the object
sought by her in the maze of pleasure was simply an indemnification
for her husband's absence: and not possessing a mind stored by solid
instruction, or gifted with strong judgment, amiable, pliant, and fond,
she entered on this perilous career without one of those qualities
which might have enabled her to steer her course with safety.

Thus exposed, she risked becoming the victim of any designing persons
who found it their amusement or their interest to render her the
subject of licentious animadversion. Where almost every event, as in
the kind of life described, bears some analogy, little variety occurs
to mark the progress of time. One intrigue resembles another; one
slander is like its neighbour; one _soirée_ is a specimen of all: and
unless, indeed, some defiance of morality more glaring than usual, some
solecism in a marriage or a ball, a death or a breakfast, take place,
there is little for the chronicler of the system to register in his
page.

Ministers had looked forward to rest after the burthen of the session;
the nobles had gone to their country seats to enjoy the beauties of the
"sere and yellow leaf," there to renew the dissipations of the town.
Hither, too, the invited _intrigant_ had followed the object of his
present pursuit, to tell in shady bowers the tale, so often told before
to others, of treacherous love; while the sportsman, with more open
and more honest if not nobler aim, hied him to moors and highlands in
pursuit of his ruling passion.

If, during the last moments of the waning season, nothing of stronger
character had occurred, on Lady Glenmore's and Mr. Leslie Winyard's
part, to attract the particular notice of the circle in which their
_liaison_ was matter of conversation, still there was no relaxation
of _his_ attentions, or of _her_ apparent preference, to justify the
belief that he had relinquished his pursuit, or that she had discarded
him.

Lady Tilney, therefore, continually urged Lady Tenderden to the
necessity of adopting the measures she had proposed; and the latter,
having satisfied herself that no unpleasant responsibility was likely
to attach to her, consented to fill her allotted part in the measure,
and propose to Lady Glenmore to accompany her on a tour.

"What do you do with yourself this summer?" said Lady Tenderden to the
latter, as she was sitting _tête-à-tête_ with her one morning.

"Indeed I do not in the least know what are Glenmore's plans; but I
should hope we shall go to the country somewhere, for I begin to feel
that my health suffers from the racket of a town life. But whatever
_he_ chooses I shall like best, for nothing would do me any good if he
were not to be of the party."

"_Oh! quelle enfantillage!_ Well! I hoped you had chased away that bad
habit of being always in de leading-string. What! _you_ a minister's
wife, and suppose that he is to follow you up _stair_ and down _stair
en nourrisson_ all your life! My dear, how would de state be taken care
of after this fashion?"

"True," said Lady Glenmore, sighing, "and I am now used to be alone."
In fact Lady Tenderden knew that these words were uttered more from
habit than from feeling them in the painful degree in which they would
once have been spoken; and she replied,

"Well then, my dear ladi, _il faut prendre son partie_; and since it
is impossible you should have him always _à vos trousses_, what think
you of making a little excursion with me to _Les Eaux de Barèges_, or
to Spa, for two or three months in the _belle saison_? This would, I
should think, exactly suit you: it will refresh your beauty, refit your
_toilette, et vous reviendrez entièrement renouvellée. On se ressent
de la fumée de Londres._ It is quite necessary to go away; and a
_villegiatura_ in England is so dull!"

"What, go abroad!" said Lady Glenmore with unfeigned surprise.

"_Vous êtes impayable_," rejoined Lady Tenderden, "_comme j'ai souvent
eu l'honneur de vous dire_. One would imagine you lived a hundred years
ago, when people talked of going abroad as they would of going to the
moon;--but, now, abroad is at home. _Allons!_ I will not allow you to
hesitate. Leave me to settle the matter with Glenmore. I will arrange
every thing; and he shall come and meet you, and bring you home, in
case I choose to pass the winter at Paris."

Lady Glenmore had not the least idea that her husband would think of
consenting to this proposal, but gave a sort of half acquiescence, more
to escape from Lady Tenderden's persecuting entreaties, than from any
wish to realize the scheme; and she was quite astonished, some days
afterwards, to find Lord Glenmore of opinion that this plan would be
the pleasantest thing in the world for her, the best adapted to recruit
her health, and in all ways the most eligible. Half grieved at the
thoughts of absence from him, half gratified at his eager desire to
procure her a pleasure, and persuaded at length by his solicitations
to try the remedy of change of air for the languor which had of late
appeared to have affected her naturally good constitution,--the wish
too of yielding implicit obedience to his will,--all combined to
determine to consent; and she finally agreed to the proposed excursion,
which was soon followed by preparations and arrangements for their
departure to Barèges.




CHAPTER XI.

MARRIAGE MANŒUVRES.


While events thus intimately connected with Lady Glenmore's
happiness were silently progressing, Lord Albert D'Esterre's mind
was engrossed and torn by a thousand contending feelings of a nature
wholly different, but not less fatally destructive of his peace.
After recovering from the violence of the first shock which Lady
Dunmelraise's sudden departure had occasioned, he had remained torpid
and incapable of action: then again, inwardly harassed by the most
lively anxiety, he had awaited, with an agony of suspense which none
can know save those who have experienced how "hope deferred maketh the
heart sick," the communication which he felt Lady Dunmelraise could not
possibly long delay, relative to Lady Adeline.

During each of the four and twenty hours which had passed since the
blow had fallen on him, Lord Albert had thus been the victim of one
contradictory passion or other: but still, in the alternate storm
or lull of his emotions, he had mechanically sought the society of
the only person in the world whom he now believed entered into his
feelings, or took any real interest in his fate. It may be readily
supposed that Lady Hamlet Vernon did not lose the advantage which this
undivided share of his time afforded her; and she found means, even in
the state of apathy in which Lord Albert seemed plunged, and during
the lengthened silence to which, at intervals, he gave way even in her
presence, to impress him, by a thousand attentions, with a sense of
the deep sympathy she felt in all his sufferings. At the same time,
she knew the wound that rankled at his heart was yet too recent to be
rudely touched, and the paroxysm of his malady too violent to bear
those remedies which, with the skilful and tender solicitude of one
who watches a patient on the bed of sickness, she awaited a favourable
moment to administer, but forced not injudiciously upon his acceptance.

With one exception only, no event occurred, no word was spoken, no
circumstance had been alluded to, that could in the remotest degree
bring forward the dreaded name of Lady Adeline. When, however, Lord
Albert heard, accidentally, at Lady Hamlet Vernon's, that Mr. Foley had
also left town a few days after Lady Dunmelraise, his feelings were
roused to a pitch that nearly decided him on hastening to Dunmelraise
in person. Nor is it probable, notwithstanding Lord Albert's former
resolves, that he would longer have hesitated to take this step, had
he not been assured, in the most pointed and positive manner, by Lady
Hamlet herself (who foresaw and dreaded the effect of this natural
impulse), that Mr. Foley had _not_ followed Lady Adeline, but was gone
on a visit to some other part of the country.

This intelligence again changed the current of his feelings, and for
the moment he was lulled into a security, that while his rival appeared
not in Adeline's presence, she would have leisure and freedom of mind
to reflect and repent of the cruelty of her behaviour towards himself;
and vainly imagined that there was better hope in leaving her to the
workings of her own heart, than by giving way to any reproaches which
he might have made.

Thus he lost the only chance that remained to him, of avoiding the blow
which was so soon to annihilate all hope. It was a fortnight after Lady
Adeline's leaving London, that the post brought him a letter, at sight
of the well-known characters of which he trembled; for with one glance
he recognized them to be the hand-writing of Lady Dunmelraise. He knew
that that letter must be the arbiter of his fate, that it must lead to
an explanation; and he felt that no explanations were likely to prove
happy ones. For a few moments he held the letter in his hand, dreading
to break the seal, for he was aware that it was the messenger which was
either to condemn him to the loss of Adeline, or give him the power to
seek her as his wife; and, of the latter, something within his breast
forbade the hope. At length he slowly tore open the paper, and, with a
gasping eagerness, read as follows:

     "My dear Lord Albert D'Esterre,

 "The period which was to decide the fulfilment of the wishes
 entertained by Lord Tresyllian and the late Lord Dunmelraise
 respecting yourself and Lady Adeline has at length arrived. Wishes
 of this kind, however, are unfortunately too often subject to the
 same changes which attend on every thing earthly; and it would
 be weak, therefore, as well as wrong, to lament over them when
 unrealized: still less should we do so, when their accomplishment no
 longer appears to hold out that prospect of felicity which, in the
 present instance, I am certain, was the only motive for their first
 indulgence. I need not, my lord, enter upon the reasons which have
 induced my daughter to resign the honour of an alliance with your
 house: they will naturally suggest themselves to your own heart; and
 if they do not do this, I consider an explanation of them would be an
 intrusion on my part, of which I should be sorry to be guilty.

 "I remain, my dear Lord Albert D'Esterre,

     "Your very faithful and obedient

     "ELIZA DUNMELRAISE."

 "P. S. I forward a copy of my letter to Lord Tresyllian by this post."

"It is then as I thought," exclaimed Lord Albert. "Faithless,
treacherous, cold-hearted Adeline! why did I ever love you? Why place
my happiness on so frail, so unworthy a tenure? But it is well; it is
better thus. Since I have now no cause to mourn your loss, I will not
suffer grief for such an object to master me. It is well that you are
lost to me. Lost!"--he started at the sound, as he repeated, "Yes, lost
to me for ever!" and his lip trembled, while a sense of suffocation
oppressed and overpowered him, and tears, burning tears, burst from his
eyes. Not softly, not refreshingly, did they flow, but like the lava's
flood, which scathes the path down which it courses. For two days and
two nights Lord Albert remained in the most pitiable state of mind. He
would see no one, for to whom could he unburthen his griefs? and not
to speak of them was impossible: to whom would he deign to show his
lacerated heart? yet to what other subject than that by which it was
torn could he give utterance?

The necessity of replying to Lady Dunmelraise's letter was the first
thing that aroused him from this lethargy of sorrow; but when he
essayed the task, he found it one of no easy nature. He read and
_re-read_ the letter; he endeavoured to extract from it some gleam of
hope, some opening of possible change; but it was so calm, so cuttingly
and despairingly reasonable, so dignified yet so decided in its tone,
so meek yet so authoritative, that he felt it pronounced a verdict
which admitted of no appeal.

"Be it so," he said, with the composure of despair; "but, at least, I
too will speak my mind. Yet how? In a brief answer embody a world of
thought? How can words convey the sense of a broken heart? No! language
cannot do that. And if it could paint my feelings, why should I humble
myself before those who have thus sported with and spurned them? why
lay bare the weakness of my heart to those who have proved themselves
incapable of compassion? What can I expect to gain by so doing?
Nothing."

Blinded by this false reasoning, he felt, at that moment, that he would
have rejected Lady Adeline's hand, could he have gained it; convinced,
as he was, that her affections were no longer his own. Besides, who
ever reclaimed or regained a heart by reproaches? And then again
relapsing into tenderness, he mourned over the defalcation of that
purity and truth which he had worshipped even more than her charms. All
these, and more than these, were the thoughts which checked the flow of
Lord Albert's pen as he wrote copy after copy in answer to the letter,
and tore each, in despair of ever writing one which could in any degree
comprise or convey his mixed and agonized feelings.

But again the necessity of some answer pressed upon him; and, although
with the conviction that none which he could write at that moment would
be adequate to express what he felt, or prove a faithful interpreter of
the thousand tortures that possessed him, he finally traced and folded
up a few brief sentences, sealing the envelope immediately, as if to
preclude the possibility of further delay. Yet once more he hesitated,
once more a wish arose to write altogether in a different tone and
strain; but then he rapidly recalled to his aid all his late reasonings
and feelings on the subject, and finally despatched the following
letter:

     "Dear Lady Dunmelraise,

 "It would be doing injustice to my own feelings, if I did not state
 that they alone have prevented my answering your letter sooner;
 the purpose and tenor of which made me too plainly feel, that any
 development of the sufferings called forth by its contents would be
 equally misplaced and obtrusive to you, as well as to Lady Adeline.

 "To say that any emotion of _surprise_ has mingled with my sorrow
 would be contrary to truth, because I had felt the sudden and
 unexpected departure of your ladyship from London (not even
 communicated to me till your present letter) announced some decided
 change in your opinion and determinations in regard to myself. There
 is one point, however, for which, in the midst of all my sufferings,
 I must feel grateful: it is, that the letter which announces to me
 the forfeiture of that happiness which for years I have been taught
 to cherish and consider as my own, leaves me no doubt that the
 future welfare of Lady Adeline now centres in some other object, in
 the attainment of which it will be more surely realized, than had it
 continued to rest on me. That that welfare may be realized in every
 sense of the word will ever be the prayer of,

     "Dear Lady Dunmelraise,

     "Your faithful and affectionate servant,

     "D'ESTERRE."

 "P. S. I shall of course communicate your letter, accompanied by my
 answer, to my father, Lord Tresyllian."

No sooner was this letter beyond the power of Lord Albert's recall,
and actually on the way to Dunmelraise, than he would have given every
thing he possessed could he have changed its tenor: but this was only
one of those fluctuations of passion, of which he had of late been so
cruelly the sport; and the impulse of the moment, had its object been
attained, would as readily have given place to some other of a quite
different tendency. When the mind is once suffered to float about
without a guiding principle of action, it is a mercy and a miracle if
the being thus actuated does not become the prey of destruction.

As Lord Albert perused over and over again the copy of his answer, he
imagined he read in it sufficient ground to call forth an explanation,
on the part of Lady Dunmelraise, of the causes which had led to her
sudden abandonment of Lady Adeline's engagement with himself. But then
he speculated upon objects which like a blind man he could not see;
for never admitting, nor indeed feeling conscious, that it was his own
errors which had wrought the change in Lady Adeline, he never could
rightly apprehend the line of conduct which of necessity she must
pursue. If he had done so, had he taken the beam from his own eye, then
would he clearly have seen to take the mote from hers; and it would
not have required a second perusal of his answer to Lady Dunmelraise
to have acknowledged that it afforded no opening whatever, whether
from its tone or its contents, to induce herself or Lady Adeline to
swerve from the course they had adopted, or lead them to any other
determination than that which they had already avowed.

He however endeavoured to make himself think otherwise, and in some
degree he succeeded in this object; for what distortion will the
imagination not assume when warped by passion? In this delusive hope he
continued for some days, vainly expecting every post to bring him some
communication from Dunmelraise. How little he knew Lady Dunmelraise's
feelings! how falsely he judged of his own! As soon as she perused
his letter, she did not for a moment think of replying to it. She
had indeed not doubted, for weeks past, that Lord Albert's heart and
affections were totally alienated from her child; but the degree of
cold indifference with which, in her _reading_ of his answer, he seemed
to cast her off, exceeded what she could have thought possible. It
may be that, in her interpretation of the letter, Lady Dunmelraise
yielded in some degree to her previously-formed prejudices; and, as
is ever the case when we yield to prejudice, saw through them as
through a glass darkly, and pronounced the being who could thus coldly
renounce such a treasure as Adeline wholly unworthy of further thought.
Far from feeling, therefore, that Lord Albert's reply required any
further notice, or that it contained any thing which could raise an
after-regret if passed by in silence, or reanimate a dying spark of
hope in Lady Adeline's breast, she considered it final and definitive,
and without hesitation placed the letter in her daughter's hands.

Lady Adeline's sentiments, on having perused it, were in accordance
with Lady Dunmelraise's; but as soon as the first brief flush of
indignation had passed away, the bitterness of sorrow that was rooted
in her heart claimed its full power, and _grief, not anger_, preyed
like a canker on the bloom of her existence. Lady Dunmelraise watched,
week after week, with an anxiety proportioned to its object, for a
return of something like cheerfulness on the countenance of her dear
child; but though resignation sat on Lady Adeline's pallid brow, and
beamed in her angel smile, still there was a settled melancholy, a
change of fearful import, impressed on her whole person. Even her very
movements, once so gay and elastic, were now languid and measured, like
one who was soon to pass to another sphere. Nothing of the vivacity of
her age and temperament remained; and Lady Dunmelraise felt that she
waited for the hoped-for change in vain.

It was therefore some relief to her, when a visit from Mr. Foley
created a variety in the daily routine of their lives; and Lady
Dunmelraise thought or fancied that the exertions which Lady Adeline
made, in order to be agreeable to one for whom she had always
entertained a maternal solicitude, seemed the only circumstance that
at all dissipated the gloom in which her daughter was now habitually
involved. Mr Foley, however, while he remarked this favourable
change, ascribed it to other motives; and with that self-love which
predominated in his character, he saw in it a growing preference
for himself, and waited only for a season in which he conceived the
feelings of Lady Dunmelraise and her daughter would be sufficiently
prepared to admit of a disclosure of his sentiments, to make an open
avowal of them.

Meanwhile, Lord Albert, who was equally with Lady Adeline the victim
of self-delusion and martyred affection, continued to drag through the
heavy hours till even suspense itself became blunted. But Lord Albert
continued to strengthen himself in what he deemed the duplicity and
heartlessness of her conduct, and found a diversion to his sufferings
in the idea that they were occasioned by an unworthy object, whom
he was called upon by every rational principle to banish from his
remembrance.

At length it likewise became known to him that Mr. Foley was actually
an inmate of Dunmelraise, and this circumstance set the seal to the
erroneous conviction which for so many months had been gaining on his
deluded mind. Whilst thus discarded, as he imagined, by her whom he
had, in fact, always loved dearer than the whole world beside; wounded
in his tenderest feelings, and offended in his family pride; Lord
Albert unhappily found himself supported in his mistaken apprehensions
by his father, Lord Tresyllian, who, accustomed to refer most actions
to love of aggrandisement and power, and having survived those softer
affections which at one time bound him to Lord Dunmelraise, and made
him anxiously wish for a union between their children, now only saw
in Lady Dunmelraise's withdrawing from this engagement some concealed
object of interest, which impelled him scornfully to resent her
behaviour, and thus confirm the delusive views of his son.

From the time of Lord Albert's having come of age, the entire
independence of his circumstances had (without violation, however, of
any filial duty on his part) occasioned his intercourse with his father
to be of rare occurrence; but when he communicated the purport of Lady
Dunmelraise's letter to Lord Tresyllian, an identity of feelings seemed
to arise between them; and in their offended pride a tie of sympathy
was freshly formed, by which they mutually encouraged each other in an
ill-founded and unjust resentment.

Lord Albert's heart, however, was far differently constituted from
his father's, and in most other respects they felt not together.
Still, therefore, he found himself alone, as it were, in the world,
without one kindred breast on which to lean. Perhaps no sensation
of pain is greater than this conscious loneliness of being. He had
hitherto avoided all open confidence with Lady Hamlet Vernon on the
subject of Lady Adeline; for though she was well acquainted with
all that had passed, yet, from motives of delicacy, as well as from
a secret mistrust even of her sympathy, he had remained silent.
But when at length freed from the only tie which sealed his lips,
the long-cherished and lingering hope of Lady Adeline's returning
affection, it required no stimulus to make Lord Albert unburthen his
heart and all its griefs to one, the only one, who, he thought, entered
into them. The subject once commenced, the whole troubled tide of
fears, belief, conviction, and subsequent indignation, was poured into
her ear.

Too readily, and with too greedy delight, did she receive this
confidence, as the sweet confirmation of all her long-nurtured and
most ardent wishes; and the first step she took, in consequence, to
heighten his resentment against Lady Adeline, was to avow a knowledge
of Mr. Foley's long residence at Dunmelraise to be the result of his
passion for her; a passion approved, she said, by Lady Dunmelraise, as
well as by her daughter, and which was soon to terminate in marriage;
adding, at the same time, that she felt, as well as their mutual
friends (meaning Lady Tilney and her _coterie_), that it was matter of
congratulation that an alliance so thoroughly destructive to his views
and pursuits of life should thus be dissolved.

While in this manner Lady Hamlet Vernon fixed the dagger more firmly
in Lord Albert's breast, she no longer hesitated to evince for him, in
every word, and look, and action, her devotedness; and it was not in
nature, that under such an influence he should be allowed to retrace
his steps, even had he wished to do so, or to reflect on his own
conduct; although, had he had recourse to self-examination, even in
this stage of the business, he might still have retrieved his error.

Day after day, week after week, his diseased state of mind gained
ground, till at length the whole moral man became corrupt, and Lord
Albert was the slave of her whom he would have loathed, could he but
have seen the snare she had so artfully drawn around him. It is true,
the duties of his official situation employed him some hours every
morning; and in the routine of these there was no analogy to any thing
like feeling, so that they proved a temporary antidote to pain: but
when they were over, he was in the society of Lady Hamlet Vernon, and
of Lady Hamlet Vernon alone; for it was the nature of a mind like his
to be wholly engrossed by one object.

The world, that in reality cares for no one's actions, except as
affecting itself, looked on with indifference, and saw in Lord
Albert's course only curious matter for speculation. Some pitied him
as a fool, should he contemplate matrimony with Lady Hamlet Vernon;
while others applauded the dexterity of the woman who could succeed
in leading him captive, and secure to herself so great a prize. But
one friend yet remained to Lord Albert, who would have sincerely
lamented the circumstance, could he have believed such an event as
marriage possible; because though Lady Hamlet Vernon was undoubtedly
clever, handsome, fascinating, yet he saw in her no sound intrinsic
qualities, nor was there attached to her rank or situation any of that
preponderating family influence, which he could have wished should
distinguish the wife of his friend. But Lord Glenmore was not one of
those who doubted Lord Albert's good sense or principles; and though
he saw him involved in a _liaison_ which he was far from approving,
still he looked upon it as one of those temporary attachments from
which he hoped soon to see him liberated, and therefore discarded all
serious fears for him. But Lord Glenmore was unfortunately mistaken.
The entanglement in which Lord Albert was involved was not one easily
to be broken through.

Lady Hamlet Vernon's object was advancing rapidly, and her victim
nearly sacrificed. London was now almost empty. The only individuals
of note remaining in it were some official persons, who were looking
forward with anxiety to the moment of their departure. Lady Glenmore's
arrangements for her visit to the continent had been finally adjusted;
and she had at length quitted town with a heart divided between regret
at leaving her husband, and that kind of anticipated pleasure which
attends a first visit to a foreign country.

Whether any regret mingled with these sentiments, as she journeyed
with Lady Tenderden to the point of embarkation, at the idea of being
likely to lose in her absence the society of Mr. Leslie Winyard,
it is difficult to say; and equally so whether the result of this
absence would break through that intimacy with the latter, which
her _soi-disant_ friends considered to be of such perilous tendency.
Mr. Leslie Winyard certainly did not leave town immediately on her
departure.

In the midst of these final removals for the season, Lady Hamlet Vernon
found it difficult to arrange her passing the approaching autumn in the
society of Lord Albert. To propose to himself directly any project of
the kind was, she thought, hazardous; and though feeling the importance
of securing to herself his presence, she was obliged to trust to
chance, and to the habitual influence which she knew she had obtained
over him, in order to ensure his following her wherever she went.

"Where do you mean to pass your autumn, Lord Albert?" she said one day
to him, speaking as if in an unpremeditated manner, and announcing at
the same time her intention of going to Tunbridge. "Perhaps you will be
induced, if you have no other plan in view, to pay me a visit there?"

"Yes," he replied, sighing, "I shall like it exceedingly. Where can _I_
go but where you are? Nobody else in the wide world, save yourself,
cares for me;"--and a tender glance from Lady Hamlet Vernon gave back a
confirmation of the latter part of this querulous speech.

Many days more did not elapse, when Lord Albert, although pressed by
Lord Glenmore in the most friendly manner to accompany him to his
country seat during the recess, misled by the unfortunate and false
conviction that no one participated in his feelings save her who had
in reality caused their bitterness, blindly yielded to the delusion of
this hollow attachment, and found himself loitering round Lady Hamlet
Vernon's footsteps on the furze-clad hills of Tunbridge.




CHAPTER XII.

PROCEEDINGS ABROAD.


However small the interest which Lady Tilney really took in preserving
the purity of Lady Glenmore's character _intacte_, still her wishes for
the preservation of that outward decorum which she deemed necessary
towards the maintenance of her _coterie_'s respectability were
perfectly sincere. It will not, however, appear that in this instance
her wishes were likely to be realized.

On landing on the continent, the point to which Lady Glenmore and Lady
Tenderden directed their steps was Spa, having abandoned their previous
intention of going to Barèges; a change in their plans, which they
decided upon partly from the length of the journey, and partly from
Lady Glenmore's not liking to be so very far from her husband. When
they reached Spa, they found some few of their acquaintance already
there, foreigners as well as English; and ten days had not elapsed
from their arrival, before Mr. Leslie Winyard, accompanied by Lord
Gascoigne, joined their circle.

Lady Tenderden had already made a selection of such as were to
constitute her society, and of course these latter persons were
admitted in the number. Allowing for change of place and difference of
hours, the same desultory mode of life was pursued by them at Spa as in
London, and at best the same vacuity of mind and intention became the
result. This negative description of the passing hours, however, was
not applicable to all. Of course, in the present instance, there could
have been but one motive which induced Mr. Leslie Winyard to resign the
pleasures of an English autumn for the waters of Spa; and this fact he
seemed at no pains to conceal. Lady Glenmore was his avowed object.

There is something always unfavourable to virtuous happiness in the
_voluntary_ absence of a wife from her husband, and especially if she
has designedly or carelessly, from vanity or _désœuvrement_, given
encouragement to marked attentions from any other than her husband.
Whatever may be alleged by some, that absence makes meeting sweeter,
and renovates affection, it may be laid down as a rule well known to
experience, that genuine wedded love is best maintained by that sweet
habitude which renders each a part of the other, and which feels not
that it can live separate from that dearer self; and happy, and only
truly happy, are those married persons who, in an honest heart, feel
that they can add to love virtue, and to virtue habit; so that, when
long years have gone by as a tale that is told, they can look back upon
their course with joy, and feel it dearer as they know it to have been
hallowed by the _lungo costume_ and the _dolce memorie_.

_Unnecessary_ absences, on the contrary, between married persons,
are at best very dangerous experiments: they induce in women an
independence of feeling inimical to tenderness, and incompatible with
the duties of a wife; and encourage, on the part of others, an intimacy
and a freedom of manner, to the abandonment of those forms which, in
the presence of the husband, would perhaps be observed.

Thus it was in the case of Lady Glenmore. Mr. Leslie Winyard, already
too much encouraged by her easy good-nature and affability, impelled by
vanity to suppose himself irresistible when he chose to give himself
the trouble of being so, and not wholly indifferent to her whom he now
pursued, considered Lady Glenmore's absence from England as intended
to afford an opportunity for the furtherance of their intimacy. The
mode of life at Spa, and similar places on the continent, where the
English congregate, however resembling the empty folly of London in its
moral effect, differs in this respect, that it is more like living in
a family circle, divested of the ceremonious restraints of societies
in great cities. The daily routine of arrangements which threw all
those who circled together into an unavoidable familiarity, the long
excursions during the day, the repose under some shade after fatigue,
the return at night, the supper, the dance that not unfrequently
followed, proved all of them too favourable opportunities for a man of
intrigue.

If, therefore, Lady Glenmore was in peril, when guarded by the forms of
society, in the presence of a husband whom she loved, and feeling the
wholesome moral check which, to a young mind entering on the snares of
life, the consciousness of a supposed cognizance of parents and friends
so usefully imposes,--if, under all these circumstances of protection,
she had yielded to, or rather been entangled in, an indiscretion
respecting her intimacy with Mr. Leslie Winyard,--how much more fearful
was her present danger, when no restraints of the kind were at hand to
guard or to warn her!

Had Lady Tilney's object been of that true and high nature which
proposed no result but to save Lady Glenmore's virtue, she would
not have intrusted her to the guardianship of such a person as Lady
Tenderden, who united to the airy flightiness of a Frenchwoman the
spirit of an _intrigante_, which is to be found in all nations. But
Lady Tilney's object was merely worldly and prudential, namely, that
of removing a probable _fracas_ from her own circle in England; and
this point carried, the other was of small importance. Lady Tenderden
had drawn round her a society at Spa, quite in harmony with that which
she had been accustomed to live in. There were several persons of the
_coterie_ of London, who, from time to time, made their appearance
among them, and kept up the tone of the _rassemblement_ to its own
peculiar pitch. Mingled with these were foreigners of distinction and
diplomatists of various nations, who, from forming a false estimate
of English society, as most foreigners do, fall into a very natural
mistake respecting the higher classes in England, of whom they judge
_en masse_ by the limited specimen which they are taught to consider
as the sample of our nobility, and who therefore, with this false
view, circled round Lady Tenderden and her friends on the present
occasion, as the centre of attraction and a model of English manners; a
melancholy mistake, and one by which foreigners have been led into the
greatest errors respecting our higher classes.

Although this remark did not at first apply personally to Lady
Glenmore, yet, under the circumstances of the case, Lady Tenderden
was not a fitting guardian in any respect for her; and in the end,
during their residence at Spa, the permission of Leslie Winyard's
_dévouement_ made it attach to her with too much truth, and she became,
consequently, as much the subject of animadversion and example as
Lady Tenderden herself. In the life of dissipation thus followed, not
even the seventh day was left for reflection or repose. The too often
misapplied and dangerous adage, that "one must do at Rome as they do
at Rome," was an excuse for entirely forgetting the Sabbath to keep
it holy, an observance which is in some degree attended to amongst us
(except by the most notoriously profligate); but it has been a just
reproach of many thinking Roman Catholics on our nation, that, when
abroad, we lay aside the religion we profess, at least its forms, while
we laugh at those which _they_ follow.

Of what religion are we, then? might be the natural question asked, and
was one which applied certainly to Lady Glenmore, who had now learnt
the most fatal of all lessons, that it is unnecessary to hallow the
Sabbath day; and she went on to learn, that she could live and be happy
without her husband. Letters came from him, breathing kindness and
affection, and these were answered with something like a corresponding
feeling, for still in her heart his image was enshrined, although her
vanity betrayed her into the perilous error of being engrossed at the
moment by the attentions and presence of another. Lord Glenmore's
letters, however, contained no hope of his being able to join her at
Spa; for government contemplated an earlier assembling of parliament
than usual, and the presence of all the ministers was required at an
unusually early period. This circumstance, however, affected Lady
Glenmore but little, for her regret was waning into carelessness at his
absence. Thus bound to England, Lord Glenmore expressed his wish that
Lady Glenmore should leave Spa about the end of October or middle of
November, and proceed by the way of Paris, where he still indulged a
faint hope that he should be able to join her.

Notwithstanding much dissuasion on the part of Lady Tenderden and
Mr. Leslie Winyard against obeying these injunctions, Lady Glenmore
remained firm, and they shortly after were on their way to Paris.
Mr. Leslie Winyard, of course, took his route to Paris likewise; for
though he began to feel that the affair _trainé en longueur_, he was
determined at least to enjoy the _renommée_ of adding another name
to the list of his successes. At Paris the rumour of his attachment
to Lady Glenmore found a wider range, and amongst the mixed, and
larger aggregate of English, became the subject of more marked and
varied observation. Here, therefore, in the same selfish spirit of
worldly-mindedness which had induced Lady Tilney to send Lady Glenmore
to the continent, Lady Tenderden saw the propriety of giving some
admonitory hints to the latter: such as, "_It was not well to stake
all on one throw_: that it was not in _good taste_ to have but one
cavalier always in attendance; and that the _préféré_ himself would
cease to be flattered by that preference, if he had _champ libre_
always at command, without any competitors to dispute the honour with
him. Besides, there is a certain _retenue_ to be observed," she went
on to say, "by women of fashion, who should never give the vulgar an
advantage over them, by not having a ready reply to make, or be made,
to any disadvantageous or impertinent observations: for example, if
they should say, 'Mr. Leslie Winyard is always at Lady Glenmore's
elbow,' it might be answered, 'And so is Prince Luttermanne, and Lord
Gascoigne, and Lord Baskerville, and a thousand others.' A little
address, my dear Lady Glenmore, sets all this sort of things to rights;
only one must know how to conduct oneself."

"There is nothing wrong," replied the still innocent but somewhat
perplexed Lady Glenmore, "and therefore there is nothing to set right."

"_Non, assurément, nothing wrong_," answered Lady Tenderden; adding
in her _doucereux_ voice, with more of truth than was usual under her
_patte de velours_, "and that is _just the reason_ why you are not
sufficiently upon your guard."

These hints, however, appeared so indirect in their tendency, and of so
little consequence in the eyes of her to whom they were addressed, that
they were merely smiled at, and passed by unheeded.

In this state matters continued till far on in November. It was the
very season when Paris was beginning to fill. A few weeks of protracted
absence from home was again pleaded for by Lady Tenderden, even though
Lord Glenmore, from press of business in the ministry, had been obliged
to abandon all idea of joining them; and accordingly they lingered on
from day to day at Paris.

The same cause which prevented Lord Glenmore from leaving London
obliged Lord Albert D'Esterre to quit Brighton, whither he had
accompanied Lady Hamlet Vernon. In returning to the subject of this
_liaison_, few particulars can be adduced which would not appear trite
and stale. Like all intimacies of the same nature, it had during
this interval gradually approached a climax. Nothing in this world
is stationary: the world itself is passing swiftly away; but the use
or abuse we make of existence remains. Lord Albert's intimacy with
Lady Hamlet Vernon, must of necessity have either assumed a decided
character, or have been totally broken off; and, unfortunately for
him, she played too deep a stake to lose for one moment that vigilance
and foresight for which she was so distinguished, and which alone had
constituted the success of her designs. It may be readily imagined that
she now redoubled all her care, to secure the prize which was so nearly
within her grasp. During the last few weeks, in which Lord Albert and
herself had continued isolated from all other society, with nothing
to call his attention away from her, or to direct the current of his
thoughts into any other channel, the result may be easily guessed.

Lord Albert made proposals of marriage; and it is unnecessary to add
they were accepted with a transport of joy which Lady Hamlet Vernon
could ill conceal within the bounds of prudence, but which, to his
deluded view, appeared to be the effusion of a genuine and devoted
passion. It is impossible for any generous nature not to feel gratified
by the devotion of another; and Lord Albert was glad to mistake this
gratitude for a tenderer and more spontaneous movement of the heart.
Yet, as the moment approached for allying himself for ever to any other
than her whose image, in despite of all his endeavours to the contrary,
came back to him at intervals in the clouds of the air, in the shadows
of the waters, or the dreams of the night, he sought for delay. Strange
to say, too, some lingering doubt of Lady Adeline Seymour's becoming
the wife of Mr. Foley at times crossed his fancy, for it was more like
a vision of the fancy than a rational belief; but still he wished to
think that she should be the first to bind herself to another; and with
a feeling not amenable to the laws of reason, he looked anxiously in
the newspapers every day to see the announcement of her nuptials.

Under these circumstances, and with this feeling, he was called to town
to attend official business, with the hope, however, in a few days, of
returning to Lady Hamlet Vernon. Arrived in London, he found himself,
the first time for many months, absent from her, and robbed of the
illusory charm of her society; a charm which he had taught himself to
consider as necessary to him as the air he breathed. He now found, when
official duties were over, that the hours hung heavily on his hands.

It had perhaps been owing to the idea of his having so long indulged
in a selfish gratification, which must of necessity have drawn down
observations derogatory to the character of Lady Hamlet Vernon, that
had finally determined Lord Albert to make her the offer of his hand.
But now, when away from her influence, he looked back upon the gulf
over which he had passed, and contemplated it with somewhat different
sensations; conscious that the step he had taken was irretrievable, he
felt less than ever disposed to seek diversion from his own thoughts,
or relief from them in any other quarter. He even avoided much
intercourse with Lord Glenmore, as though he was afraid the latter
should read his secret; for it was intended that his marriage should
yet be kept profoundly secret; partly in compliance with his own
feelings, which suggested that the world (and who can, or who ought to
be totally reckless of the world's award?) might blame him for allying
himself to a woman of Lady Hamlet Vernon's character, and partly at the
instance of the latter, who, though she could not explain the cause of
her apprehensions, yet dreaded lest the cup should be dashed from her
lips by some unforeseen interference.

The time that Lord Albert did not pass literally in business, he
employed in reading over Lady Hamlet Vernon's letters, which he
received daily, or in answering them; and as those she wrote breathed
the most impassioned language, his own contained enough of that
reflected hue of tenderness in them to please, if not to satisfy,
her to whom they were addressed. The time was past when solitude and
reflection could avail Lord Albert; for he had decided his fate. It was
his duty, therefore, now, as well as his interest, to encourage himself
in the belief that he truly loved the present object to whom he devoted
himself; and he carefully endeavoured to shut out all remembrances
which might recall the thought of another. Lord Albert had been nearly
three weeks absent from Lady Hamlet Vernon, when he hastened one
morning at an earlier hour than usual to Downing-street, where his
letters were always directed. He found one from her, as was customary;
but, in taking it eagerly in his hand, he was aware it did not consist,
as usual, of many sheets, but was a single letter in an envelope.

Something, he knew not what, struck him with agitation on this
recognition, and he paused on breaking the seal; then cast his eyes
hurriedly over the open page, and looked in vain for the terms of
endearment which were wont to be the first that courted his glance;
and he grew sick and dizzy as he read the first few lines, which ran
thus: "Grieved I am at heart, and stunned by this fatal blow, so
unexpected, so subversive of all our hopes. Is it not possible that,
in the dismay of the moment, you may have interpreted more severely
the words of Lady Dunmelraise than they required?" Lord Albert started
at the name of Dunmelraise, and held the letter from him, and gazed at
it again. "Lady Dunmelraise!" he repeated aloud. "What can this allude
to? And in Amelia's hand!" Again he looked at the letter, and turned
over the page, and saw the signature. A death-like shudder seized him,
and an icy chill ran through his heart. As his eye continued to run
rapidly along the lines, it met the words, "dearest Mr. Foley." Again
he paused. But he was not now in a state to reason on the propriety of
reading through a letter evidently not addressed to himself, although
he continued to do so; but, breathless with surprise, in vain essayed
to read collectedly. At length, mastering the contending feelings which
for a few moments overpowered him, he perused the letter consecutively.

 "Grieved I am at heart, and stunned by this fatal blow, so unexpected,
 so subversive of all our hopes. Is it not possible that, in the dismay
 of the moment, you may have interpreted more severely the words of
 Lady Dunmelraise than they required? Yet when I return to the copy
 of her letter, which you enclose to me, I cannot but think with you
 that there is nothing to hope. Still, how strange that both she and
 Lady Adeline should have allowed those demonstrations of your passion,
 which they must have understood, for such a length of time, without
 expressing any explicit disapprobation! And then you say, too, that
 you are confident, from every circumstance, and every word, and every
 look, that has occurred, or fallen, either from Lady Dunmelraise or
 her daughter, that D'Esterre no longer holds any place either in
 their affections or their esteem; and the conversation you report
 to have heard between Lady Delamere and her sister was certainly
 as conclusive as any thing could be of their utter rejection of the
 thought of any renewal of engagement with D'Esterre." (Lord Albert
 groaned aloud.)

 "I know not what advice to give you. I dare not urge upon you a
 perseverance in your suit, because that might eventually, if Lady
 Dunmelraise and her daughter are firmly decided against it, draw
 down an interference which would give publicity to the affair; a
 circumstance, on all accounts, decidedly to be avoided. Hitherto, I
 should suppose what has passed has been confined to their own breasts;
 for Lady Dunmelraise is too much acquainted with the world to make
 herself, or any one belonging to her, unnecessarily the subject of
 public remark. At present, you know, the secret is safe in our own
 keeping; and after many hours of painful reflection as to what you had
 best do, I think nothing remains but your going immediately abroad for
 a time, to avoid the singularity of your absence from Dunmelraise.

 "In regard to the heavy pecuniary disappointment which you must have
 experienced, dearest Mr. Foley, by this defeat of our plans, I hope
 I shall soon be in a situation to make you ample recompense; for
 D'Esterre has at length so openly declared himself, that my marriage
 cannot long be delayed; and that once accomplished, you may depend on
 my most constant exertions for all connected with your interest. In
 the meanwhile, should you require any funds for your sudden departure,
 I enclose a draft for £200. I would not have you come by Brighton to
 embark, which perhaps you might be inclined to do, knowing me to be
 there; and I think it better, for the present, that you do not write
 to me on this subject; but let me have a few lines announcing your
 arrival on the continent.

 "Again I repeat to you to count upon my most friendly assistance at
 all times. You may depend on my acquainting you, when the event on
 which now all depends shall have taken place;

     "And I am ever yours, affectionately,

     "AMELIA HAMLET VERNON."

 "P.S.--I would not have you state your intention of going abroad
 to any person; and prevent, if possible, any announcement of your
 departure in the newspapers."

No words can adequately convey an idea of Lord Albert's feelings as he
finished the perusal of this letter. It was plain, it was clear, that
a conspiracy had existed between Lady Hamlet Vernon and Mr. Foley, of
which he and Lady Adeline Seymour had become the victims. The detailed
process of language cannot concentrate in one point the thousand varied
feelings which combined in his bosom all the pangs of self-accusation
with all the joy of believing that the precious being whom he had
wronged was free from stain. Grief mingled with the conviction that
he had again found his own transcendent Adeline, bright in all her
purity, only to be convinced, at the same moment, that he had himself
placed a wide gulf between them that could never be overpassed; and the
knowledge that this was the case excited such overwhelming emotion in
his breast as defies the power of language.

It would be wrong, however, in this instance, as in all others where
reflection points a moral, not to observe the omnipotence of virtue,
which, it may be truly said, is a light to lighten our darkness; for
in the depth of Lord Albert's present sufferings there was a latent
spring of consolation in his heart, the cause of which he could little
understand or account for at the moment, and from which he was not
prepared to derive the benefit it was intended afterwards to convey;
and this consolation was a sense of humble contrition, derived from the
consciousness that the blow which had fallen upon him was righteously
dealt, and that it was only retributive justice that he should meet
his punishment from the very person for whom he had, in the indulgence
of his vanity, played with the feelings of another till at length he
sacrificed and lost her.

This sense of humility is ever the foundation of true repentance;
and true repentance brings resignation; and resignation is the balm
which soothes a wounded spirit. He soon felt that the merciful ways of
Providence had forced him unwillingly to a knowledge of his own fault,
and with a contrite heart he kissed the rod that smote him. He felt at
once as though a heavy burden were lifted from his breast. None of the
double-mindedness, none of the obscure uncertainty, by which of late he
had been oppressed and involved, now darkened his path. He was like one
who is brought from a prisoned cavern to rejoice in the wholesome air
and light of heaven. He no longer hesitated in his course, or wavered
how he should conduct himself, but determined to profit by the severe
lesson he had received, and act once more uprightly. He felt, as it
were, instantaneously, that he had never really loved Lady Hamlet
Vernon, and that vanity alone had betrayed him into her snare.

Had he loved her, would he not, even with the conscious proof before
him of her perfidious conduct, have at least mourned over a knowledge
of her baseness? As it was, he thought not of her, save in reference to
his own erring conduct.

"Oh Adeline, Adeline!" he exclaimed in bitterness of heart, "is it for
such a one as this that I have lost you, and deprived myself for ever,
not only of your affection, but your esteem? Yet, though to retrieve
the past is impossible, and to become what I once was in your eyes is
as impossible as it is to recover mine own consciousness of desert,
still I will live for you and you alone." The virtuous principle which
had thus been restored to its rightful place in Lord Albert's breast
gave him power to struggle with sorrow successfully in this his hour of
need: and though at intervals he sunk into that despondency which, lost
as he was to all his best affections and brightest hopes, could not
but flow back upon him with an overwhelming tide, still the sense of
returning virtue bore him up again, and fixed him on a rock from whence
no tide of circumstances could hurl him.

In this situation he thought, for a time, that he stood alone in the
world, without one sympathising friend; yet, perhaps, there was one
who still remained--Lord Glenmore. Should he open his heart to him?
Should he seek succour and counsel from him? No. Counsel he needed not,
for his mind was made up _how_ to act; and consolation could not, at
the present moment, flow from any earthly source. As involuntarily he
read over and over again Lady Hamlet Vernon's letter, a still renewing
sense of the baseness of the writer flashed upon him. In every turn and
phrase he thought he traced some clue to each individual circumstance
which had occurred to poison his mind, and give birth to the unworthy
suspicions he had entertained of his Adeline: every one of them, in
turn, seemed to rise up, as it were, in judgment against him; and again
he wondered how the artifices with which he had been deceived had not
before been detected by him.

The whole of his intimacy with Lady Hamlet Vernon, from its
commencement, was next reviewed. His mind went back to the first
evening in which he met her; her praises of his Adeline; the seductive
grace with which she expressed her hope, when he spoke of foreign
intimacies, that he would find some objects worthy also of his regard
and friendship in his native land. He saw, as if at the moment,
her downcast looks, and felt over again the surprise which her tone
and manner caused him. He recalled their interview at the church at
Restormel; her subsequent conversation, relative to Lady Adeline,
before he left that place for London; and in all these, and in every
other incident connected with his growing intimacy, he now beheld
the wily stratagem of a preconceived plan to win away his heart and
affection from one to whom this Circean destroyer of his peace was as
widely opposed as darkness to light.

This probing of his wounds, this investigation of the circumstances
which had involved him in error, was a wholesome though painful
exercise to his mind; for he traced his misery to its rightful
source--himself. He could not but dwell on the fearful and rapid change
which had been produced in him by a life passed in a circle whose whole
tendency was to undermine principle and destroy the understanding. He
asked himself, what was he now, compared to what he had been eighteen
months before? what action, during that period, could he recall without
blushing for the misuse or waste of time? How had his pursuits been
abandoned! his honourable views in life lost sight of! his studies
neglected! all the fruits of long and virtuous education scattered! and
himself become an object of his own and of all good men's contempt!

In reflections such as these, the hours passed away, on the day of his
receipt of the letter. He had hurried through his official business
as quickly as possible, in order to seek the retirement of his own
apartment; and there, with the picture of Adeline before him, he sat
absorbed in harrowing contemplation. So entirely had the current of
his affections been sent back to their proper channel by the revulsion
which had shaken him, that with the exception of perusing Lady Hamlet
Vernon's letter, for the purpose of bringing home more strongly the
clear conviction of her infamy, he had not felt one regret on her
account. Even the feeling of indignation, which conduct so base was
calculated naturally to excite, had not for more than a moment occupied
his heart; a heart which was as dead to any impression she could make
upon it, as though he had never known her.

Midnight had already passed, and the idea that Lady Hamlet Vernon would
be in ignorance the while of what had occurred had not struck him. He
then felt the painful part which he was called upon to perform, in
addressing the person whom he had been on the verge of making his
wife in language such as her conduct merited and his own reproaches
might dictate. He at length resolved to let the night pass, and in the
morning, if possible, to set himself to the task with a calmer mind.

He slept not, however, and arose feeling distracted and feverish.
Finding himself unable to go out, he sent, therefore, to Downing-street
for some official papers which were to be looked over. The messenger
brought back with these his letters also: amongst them there was one
from Lady Hamlet Vernon. His soul sickened at the sight, and he cast
it from him with disgust. He resolved not to open it, for he must
necessarily loathe the expressions of attachment with which he knew it
would be filled; and he determined to return it unopened, together with
his answer. This answer, in the course of the day, he despatched by
express; feeling, the moment he had given vent to his indignation, that
it was but justice to do so, both to himself, and to his injured and
lost Adeline.

The tenor of his reply may be easily conceived. He kept the original
of the letter which had so happily removed the veil of wickedness
from his eyes, but he transcribed a copy; and having animadverted on
the baseness of the arts that had been practised on himself, and the
fiend-like cruelty that had been exercised on the former cherished
object of his affections, he avowed his determination never again to
hold intercourse with her who had been the cause of so much misery and
delusion. At the same time, with a feeling of that nice honour and
noble generosity of soul which had never entirely left Lord Albert's
breast, he informed Lady Hamlet Vernon that her infamy would remain a
secret with him, unless her own future conduct towards himself should
make it necessary, in self-defence, to do otherwise.

Before this answer reached Lady Hamlet Vernon, she had been in some
degree prepared for the blow, for Mr. Foley, who was in town, on
receiving the letter which had been intended for Lord Albert, instantly
surmised the worst, and had proceeded with the utmost haste to
Brighton.--There Lord Albert's answer found him and Lady Hamlet Vernon
in all the dismay and terror which detection of so sinister an intrigue
would naturally cause.

The arrival of Lord Albert was hourly looked for by them, as the sure
consequence of what had taken place, in order to demand an explanation
of the letter which had fallen into his hands; for Lady Hamlet Vernon
was certain that she had written no other letter by that post except to
himself and Mr. Foley, and felt, therefore, a conviction on the subject
of his arrival, which was anticipated as a certainty: and although the
necessity of the moment obliged Mr. Foley and Lady Hamlet Vernon to be
in consultation together, a person was on the watch to apprise them of
his approach, so that Mr. Foley's presence might not strengthen the
suspicions already connected with his name.

Under these circumstances therefore, the arrival of a letter only was,
at the moment, rather a relief; though it had been felt by the parties
that there was more chance of Lord Albert's being still deceived, had
he been exposed to the influence of Lady Hamlet Vernon's charms in a
personal interview.--His letter was broken open in haste: the return
of her own last unopened, which fell from the envelope, sufficiently
foretold its purport. The messenger had departed after giving in the
packet, with a brief announcement that there was no reply. It would be
impossible to characterize all the feelings of disappointed passion,
self-interest, hatred, and revenge, together with the mutual reproaches
to which these gave birth between the detected actors of this infamous
intrigue.

After giving way, however, to the first ebullitions of anger against
each other, mutual recrimination, and all those scorpion-like feelings
which are the consequences of a copartnery in guilt, the sense of
necessity to secure self-preservation, and to shield themselves from
public ignominy, made them both catch eagerly at the terms of secrecy
implied in the latter sentence of Lord Albert's letter; and when
Lady Hamlet was convinced that there was no hope of regaining him
to her views, she felt the necessity of submission, and sheltering
herself under such terms as the exigency of the case required. All
love was banished from her breast by feelings of rage and shame at
her detection; and with the heartlessness of an _intrigante_, she
determined to put _bonne mine à mauvais jeu_, and boldly deny a guilt
which she knew could be but covertly imputed to her. She wrote an
answer, therefore, on the instant, to Lord Albert, couched in terms
such as the offended feelings of a haughty woman would dictate. In her
turn she cast off Lord Albert--"one for whose happiness she avowed that
she had been ready to sacrifice every thing. But now she found that
the very measures she had taken from pure devotion to himself had
been made matter of accusation against her; measures easily explained,
if an explanation had been solicited. It was he who had sought her
affections, not she his; and when he thus rudely rejected a heart which
he had taken pains to win, she could not but feel that she had escaped
from that irretrievable ruin which must have followed her union with
him." Having thus endeavoured to turn the tide of recrimination against
Lord Albert, the feeling which at the moment pressed most urgently upon
her was, as in the case of all criminal confederacies, to rid herself
of the insufferable presence of the partner of her crime; and therefore
pressing upon him the draft which had been intended originally to
remove him to the continent, she placed it in his hands for the same
purpose now, and in a few hours afterwards he had embarked for Dieppe.

Lord Albert read Lady Hamlet Vernon's communication with calm
indifference. His eyes were unsealed. He knew her character now too
thoroughly to be surprised: still less was he to be shaken from his
purpose; and was far more firmly resolved to pursue the right course
than he had ever been to follow the wrong: and wretched as he was at
heart, he found consolation in reflecting deeply on the merciful
interposition of a higher power than any earthly one, which had thus
snatched him from misery. Wretched as he was at heart, he found
consolation; and with this feeling commenced the arduous task of
bringing back his mind and heart to former principles of uprightness
and virtue.

Lady Hamlet Vernon, on her part, took a different course. Sensible that
to betray any feeling on the event would only draw down further remark
and observation, she again plunged into the society from which she had
of late withdrawn; and prolonging her stay at Brighton, avoided all
those unpleasant circumstances which, for a time at least, would have
attended her meeting Lord Albert in public.

Lord Albert D'Esterre had formed his resolution on a principle of
rectitude, and acted upon it with that degree of promptitude which is
the sure test of sincerity in well-doing. When the moment's exertion,
however, was over, his mind, enfeebled from the lengthened moral
disease under which it so long had laboured, shrunk back in conscious
weakness: and he became sensible, that however earnest the will may be,
the difficulty is great to retrace our steps from error; and that it
is still more difficult to regain firm footing in the path of virtue,
when we have wandered from it for any length of time.

The painful recollection of the hours he had lost, or more than lost,
the conviction of the misuse of his intellectual faculties, pressed
upon him with a leaden weight that seemed to defy all his efforts to
recover the power and energy of his mind. That solitude of the heart,
too, which was now in prospect before him, shed a gloom around; for,
for whom was he to live? was the natural question which now suggested
itself, and one not likely to meet a wise reply at the moment.

After-reflection, indeed, might tell him, that there is a higher
motive to live to virtue, than any which this world's affections can
afford; but to this nobler impulse he had unfortunately for the present
become insensible, and in having become so he had lost the surest
means of happiness. Lord Albert was, however, notwithstanding this
sense of destitution, unwilling, for many reasons, to throw himself on
the only stay left him--the supporting friendship of Lord Glenmore:
partly, perhaps, from that averseness to humble himself in the sight
of another, however dear, or however honourable, the individual may
be, which it is so common to human nature to feel; and also from many
mixed motives, alike of genuine good and _spurious_ quality, which
affect the purposes of all at some times and in some degree.

Lord Glenmore had in part heard and part guessed Lord Albert's rupture
with Lady Hamlet Vernon, and secretly rejoiced in the event: but
with the delicacy and kindliness of feeling which was his particular
characteristic, he tacitly entered into the unhappiness of his
friend; and thought, as he always did when he saw another fall into
temptation's snare, that had _he_ been tempted in as powerful a degree,
he also might have fallen under the like condemnation.

Without, therefore, appearing to seek Lord Albert's confidence on the
present occasion, Lord Glenmore showed him all the tender sympathy he
entertained for him by a thousand nameless kind attentions; attentions
which rekindled in Lord Albert's breast all his feelings of former
friendship, and a sense of the value of that friend from whom of late
he had been so entirely estranged. Gradually and imperceptibly they
became once more reunited in their habits of intercourse, and Lord
Albert's vacant hours were again devoted to Lord Glenmore's society.
Little did the latter suspect that the time was drawing nigh, when he
himself should require similar support and consolation to that which
he was now affording Lord Albert. But thus it is:--we are all dependent
beings one upon another; and they are wise who, by mutual good offices,
lay up for themselves a store of kindness for the hours of perplexity
and bereavement.

Several weeks had passed away, after Lord Glenmore's express wish for
Lady Glenmore's return, before the latter quitted Paris. This delay
arose not so much from a positive reluctance on her part to return
home, as from that idle habit of living in the momentary excitement
of frivolous pleasures which so much enervate the mind, and deaden
the sense of virtuous affection. Lady Tenderden's character afforded
no antidote to the bane of this growing evil; and Mr. Leslie Winyard,
of course, still bent on the pursuit of Lady Glenmore, used all his
endeavours to retard her stay in Paris as long as possible.

At length, however, the day of their departure came; and when she
arrived in London, she was received in the arms of an affectionate
and too confiding husband. Perhaps, on the first moment's reflection,
brief as these moments were, Lady Glenmore felt in this cordial
reception somewhat of self-reproof that her return had been so long
unnecessarily deferred: but it is one of the concomitant evils of such
a mode of life as hers was, that it is utterly impossible reflection
should have any permanent seat in the mind; so that the natural checks
of conscience, which at intervals will force themselves into view in
hearts not quite hardened, become gradually smothered and suppressed,
till at length they are wholly discarded.

Thus, on the morrow after Lady Glenmore's arrival, the better though
perhaps painful feelings with which she arose were not suffered long
to maintain their ascendancy. The throng of inquirers and friends,
and of _désœuvré_ persons, who flocked around her, soon banished
all reflection. The inquisitive, investigating spirit of a long
morning's _tête-à-tête_ with Lady Tilney, the empty nothingness of Lady
Ellersby's converse; the worldly-mindedness of Lady De Chere, and the
frivolity of all; with a subsequent _soirée_ that closed the scene of
her first recognizance in London; were circumstances well calculated to
turn away Lady Glenmore from any salutary train of thought, which, if
steadily entertained, might have led to a good result. She found even
in Lord Albert's constant presence (for he now almost lived with Lord
Glenmore) a secret satisfaction, a something of the continuation of
that scattering of attention which had become habitual to her during
her last four months' residence on the continent; and the circumstance
of never being alone with her husband in the once happy privacy of
domestic quiet, which some time previously she would have mourned over
and regretted, was now an agreeable relief to her. What a fatal symptom
it is of the state of the affections, when the presence of any third
person is felt to be a relief, in the habitual intercourse of daily
life between man and wife! It is a touchstone by which all married
persons may try the condition of their hearts; and one by whose proof
it is always well to abide, if any lurking evil is found to endanger
happiness.

Although Lady Glenmore might not feel that there was much to hide in
what had passed during her absence, and that many would have called
her conduct, only living as others do who live in the world, yet her
nature, originally, was so amiable and ingenuous, that she still
reserved a place in her breast for that silent monitor which had never
wholly left its station; and it told her that perhaps all that had
been said, and done, and written, and permitted, would not have been
agreeable to her husband. There are a thousand minor occurrences,
which, when considered apart, are _not_ of criminal nature; but which,
when taken together, form a tremendous aggregate of danger, and which
are most certainly detrimental to the purity of married love. If the
sources of the heart are polluted, of what value is the nature of the
virtue that is left?

Lady Glenmore certainly did feel that there were circumstances
attendant on her _séjour_ at Paris and at Spa which she would not
relate to her husband; and she was happy to think Lord Albert's
constant presence afforded a check to any but general allusions on the
subject of her tour. Had Lord Glenmore been unoccupied with public
affairs, or had he _not_ been one whose own uprightness of heart and
conduct shut out all suspicion of others, he might have observed that
something of _gêne_ in Lady Glenmore's manner rendered her different
from what she had been. But, delighted to be once more with his wife;
happy in her presence, and in the joyousness which her renovated health
and beauty diffused around him; and frequently absorbed, besides, in
those cares which abstract a man from many of those minute perceptions
that idle people are alive to, he observed not the alteration in her
manner.

Three days, however, after her return, a case addressed to Lord
Glenmore at his office in Downing-street was forwarded from the
custom-house at Dover. On the box being opened, it was found to
contain a _porte-feuille_ resembling those in which public papers
are transmitted between official personages, and was stamped with
a coronet, and with the initials G. G. The box itself was not
fastened, and was accompanied by a note from one of the heads of
the custom-house, stating, that it had been left at Dover some days
back; and, from all accounts, by one of his lordship's servants
in the hurry of departure, the initials on the box seeming to
authorize the supposition. On the note being handed to Lord Glenmore
by his secretary, he desired him to inspect the contents of the
_porte-feuille_; and when informed that it seemed to contain papers
of a private nature, Lord Glenmore desired to see it himself. He
found it filled with letters addressed to Lady Glenmore, and amongst
others, some which he recognised as being his own; and he was about
to give orders that it should be sent to his house, concluding it was
a mistake, when, on removing some of the letters, and lifting them up
for the purpose of shutting the box, a miniature portrait attracted his
eye. He thought he recognised the features. He paused for a moment,
still gazing at it. At last he exclaimed, "Why! this is surely Leslie
Winyard's portrait! How came it here? This must be a mistake!" Again he
looked at the letters, but there was no mistake. The letters were all
addressed to Lady Glenmore, and some of them were his own.

He involuntarily shuddered. For a moment he half doubted _what_ to do;
whether to close the box, and leave it to Lady Glenmore to explain a
circumstance which appeared so strange, or whether himself to endeavour
to elucidate the mystery by an investigation of the contents. He
hesitated between these two resolves, while his hand mechanically
turned the papers over. In another moment his attention was arrested
by a few brief words beginning, "You will not leave Paris, surely, so
cruelly, so unexpectedly? Remember there are duties of the heart, as
well as those of _convenance_. I rely upon your giving me some days to
prepare for your absence: indeed you owe me this favour;"--and the note
ran on in a similar strain of familiarity, and implied confidence of a
return of sentiment.

To a person of Lord Glenmore's open, unsuspicious nature, the shadow of
such a discovery as seemed now unfolding itself was paralyzing; yet he
was a man of too much strong sense alike to shrink from investigation
when such was necessary, as to act upon any sudden impulse, or form a
hasty conclusion. There was enough, however, in what he had seen, to
make him think deeply, fearfully, and to determine him on probing the
matter at once to its very source.

After a few moments' reflection, his resolution was taken. He knew
that to breathe such a suspicion as these circumstances created of
the woman he loved, even to herself, if she _were_ innocent, would be
the severest wound and deepest degradation that could be inflicted on
her heart; and if she were _not_ innocent, that it would demand more
of calm reflection, than, in the agony of excited feelings, he could
perhaps command, in order to come to any decision. He determined,
therefore, ere he took any further step in the business, to proceed
to an immediate examination of the _porte-feuille_. With every nerve
stretched to agony, and a brain on fire, he removed the papers one by
one, turning over all the letters and notes it contained. He dreaded
to find what he was searching for. Who can express the pain of such a
search? It was some time before he found any character assimilating to
those of the note he had already perused. At length, when he came near
the bottom of the portfolio, the same hand-writing presented itself on
a thousand scraps of paper, and on the direction of various letters.

Again he started, and was obliged for a moment to pause,--his senses
refused their office; but, in another, he rallied; though with that
inward tremor which checks the pulse of life, he turned them over,
and, seizing the first that presented itself, read it with a perfect
knowledge of its contents. The notes and letters were numerous, yet
he missed not one; but continued to read them carefully through with
breathless eagerness, alive to the apprehension of discovering, at
every line of their perusal, something that would inflict a more deadly
wound than he had yet received. When he came to the conclusion, he
literally gasped for breath. "Thank God," he exclaimed, as he dashed a
burning tear from his cheek, "there is nothing positively to criminate
the wife of my bosom!" But to so fond, so noble and faithful a heart
as Lord Glenmore's, was it not sufficient agony to find, that, while
absent from him, her intimacy with another had been of that kind
which could permit of such a correspondence?--a correspondence which
proved that her intercourse with Mr. Leslie Winyard had been of that
nature which sullies the purity of a married woman; and which proved,
likewise, that it had been one of daily habitude, and that not only
had the hours of the day been passed in his presence, but often, by the
dates of the notes, it was evident she must have received them in the
morning before she arose, and at night, after she had retired to rest.
Was this not sufficient to harrow up his soul? Calling, however, to
his aid as much calmness as the circumstances in which he was placed
could admit, he reperused the notes, to avoid all chance of a hasty
or superficial judgment; and again he had the consolation of feeling
certain that they in nowise criminated Lady Glenmore, however much they
proved her guilty of an indiscretion of a most perilous kind.

The letters were the artful compositions of a man of intrigue, such
as he knew Mr. Leslie Winyard to be; and in the intimacy which they
discovered there was a stain on the character of Lady Glenmore,
which, though many degrees removed from positive vice, was still a
degradation to her and to himself. And is there not a pang of long
remorse to follow such a dereliction of duty? And are there not tears
of penitence, wrung from the heart's inmost core, to be shed, which,
though they through mercy wash out sin, cannot wash out shame? And
is there not a something, too, of self-condemnation that pierces
the heart of the husband who can, in the veriest shadow of a shade,
impute to his own neglect, or carelessness, or over-weening security,
his wife's aberrations? Oh! what a world of solemn reflection was now
opened up before Lord Glenmore's view! Bitterly did he repent having
ever suffered a man of such a character as Mr. Leslie Winyard to be on
terms even of acquaintance in his house.

It was not the time, however, to dwell on this irretrievable point;
neither to give way to the suspicions which flashed across him, of
Lady Tenderden's having been, at least, deeply to blame in suffering
the progress of an affair of which she must have been aware, and which
she ought to have arrested in its course by returning home directly.
Neither did he suffer himself to dwell on the reflection, that perhaps
the society into which Lady Glenmore had been thrown in England might
have laid the foundation of her present deviation from propriety. It
was all too late. It was enough, for the present moment, to know, by
the evidence before him, that a fearful evil existed; and he prayed
inwardly that he might already have learned its full extent. He felt
that he could have no surer test how far Lady Glenmore's heart was
involved in the error of her conduct, than by a direct appeal to
herself; for he thought, "It is impossible she could as yet have lost
that ingenuousness, that openness of disposition, which was ever her
peculiar charm! The brief space of a few months cannot have uprooted
virtues which were the growth of years! Should it be,"--and again he
offered up aspirations to Heaven that strength and counsel might be
given him to act for the best under all circumstances, and as in a
Christian spirit he ought to do.

Immediate action, under a sense of mental agony, is less painful than
an inactive endurance; and Lord Glenmore hastened home to sound the
full depth of his misery. Arrived at his house, he found Lady Glenmore
was out. He felt it impossible to meet her any where but under his own
roof and alone, and was therefore determined to await her return. It
was late before she came in; and as she hurried from her carriage, she
gave orders that it should be at the door again in an hour, and was
proceeding hastily to her apartment to change her dress for dinner,
when a servant followed her half way up stairs, saying that Lord
Glenmore had desired to see her ladyship as soon as she entered. "Tell
Lord Glenmore," she replied, in a gay tone of voice, "that I am very
late, and have hardly time to dress. I am going to dine with Lady
Tenderden; but I will see him before I go out. At what time is Lord
Glenmore's carriage ordered? at eight, is it not?"

"I believe so, my lady," was the reply.

"Oh! very well. Then I shall be with him before I go out."

Lord Glenmore, however, had heard his wife's voice; and coming out of
his room he called to her, "Georgina, I must speak with you." There was
something in the tone in which he spoke unlike its usual sound, which
made Lady Glenmore, without waiting to answer, descend immediately to
his room. She entered, and was beginning to state the purport of the
message she had sent to him by the servant, when he said to her, in
the same grave and impressive tone, "Georgina, you cannot leave home
to-day."

"What is the matter?" she exclaimed. "My father! is he ill? or my
mother? What _has_ happened? Has any thing befallen _them_?--For
mercy's sake tell me;"--and she rushed into his arms trembling and in
tears. Lord Glenmore bade her compose herself. "They are well, quite
well," he said; and gently disengaging himself from her, he gazed at
her for a moment in silence, as though he would read her inmost soul;
and then said, "Georgina, have you no other cause for apprehension than
for the safety of your parents?"

"Oh, yes!" she replied wildly, "for yourself;" and again flung herself
into his arms. "Has anything grieved _you_? has any thing befallen you?"

Lord Glenmore was touched by this genuine mark of feeling for himself,
which he knew her too well to think was assumed. He sighed deeply; and
pressing his hand on his breast, unconsciously gave utterance to the
hope which, at the moment, this proof of her affection afforded him,
murmuring audibly, "All may yet be well." Lady Glenmore looked at him
with inquiring eye; when at length, taking from the table the packet
of Leslie Winyard's letters, he opened them before her, asking her if
she knew them, and if they had been addressed to herself. She looked at
them with an expression of surprise; and then mingled shame and dismay
were painted on her countenance, the colour went and came in her cheek,
her lip trembled, and covering her face with her hands, she burst into
an agony of tears.

"Georgina, I adjure you," said her husband in the most solemn tone,
rendered hollow and tremulous by emotion, "I call upon you by all that
is sacred; by your vows, plighted to me at the altar; by the love
which, if all things are not alike deceptive, you have till lately
evinced towards me----."

"Till lately!" she interrupted him, with a gesture and an expression
of the most harrowing agony, "oh! ever, ever!"--and would again have
thrown herself into his arms, but that Lord Glenmore retreated from her
advance, and she fell on her knees with clasped hands before him, and
raising her eyes stedfastly to his, remained in silent supplication,
till Lord Glenmore, evidently as much moved as herself, gently raised
her, and bidding her sit on the sofa by him, said, "You must be calm,
Georgina. I must hear your explanation. I need not ask you if you
felt there was no impropriety, as a married woman, in your receiving
notes of this description: your agitation proves that you feel it was
wrong. But I must first know how you came to admit of any addresses of
the sort; and then I must learn how far your error has proceeded, and
whether your heart is engaged in it."--Lady Glenmore shook her head
in agony of denial.--"And remember, Lady Glenmore," continued Lord
Glenmore, "that whilst the most perfect openness on your part can alone
restore you in time to my affection, so also any deception for the
moment, or any success in imposing on me, must eventually recoil on
yourself, and only hasten your ruin and the entire loss of my heart and
esteem."

Lady Glenmore remained bathed in tears, apparently unable to give
utterance to what was passing in her breast.

"If I understand you right, Georgina, by the gesture which this moment
escaped you, your heart is _not_ engaged in this affair. But how, then,
I ask, could you for a moment suffer any one to assume an intimacy with
you such as these notes testify? Surely it could not be vacancy of
affection, and in default of any object of attachment; for was I not
myself, a few short months before, the husband of your free choice? Or
is it that you are changed indeed?" he added, with a look of inquiring
anxiety.

Again Lady Glenmore shook her head in bitterness of sorrow.

"Tell me, then; how long has this kind of familiarity existed between
you and the writer of these notes? and tell me, is any one aware of
this degrading intimacy?"

"I will tell you all, Glenmore," she exclaimed; "all--all!" Lord
Glenmore shuddered to think how his happiness rested on the awful
revelation of what that all might be. "I will tell you every thing,"
she repeated; and endeavouring to still the sobs that burst from her
heaving bosom, she began.--"That you, Glenmore, should think my heart
engaged to any one but yourself is the deepest pang I feel; and if I
have been guilty, in appearance, of any imprudence or indiscretion, it
is _only in appearance_. In judging me I hope you will be merciful,
though perhaps I cannot ask this at your hands. But if you see fit to
cast me off, and if what I shall say avail me nothing in restoring
me to your affection, still my heart will be yours till it ceases to
beat; and as no one has ever shared it for an instant, so shall no one
_ever_, to my dying hour. _I_ give my heart or my affections to such a
one as Mr. Leslie Winyard?--impossible! I could not if I would. You,
you alone, can ever possess it. But to evince the tenderness which I
feel for you in public, I was told was wrong, was ridiculous; and I was
taught to think that you yourself would cease to love me if I troubled
you with demonstrations of this fondness. I was told, also, that
another than you ought to be my attendant in the world; and the example
of those around me confirmed in this idea." Lord Glenmore sighed
heavily as he felt the truth of what last fell from Lady Glenmore.

"Who _could_ have told you this?" he uttered involuntarily.

"Glenmore, did you not yourself tell me that I must look to the conduct
of those with whom I lived as the best guide for my own? did you not
tell me that Lady Tenderden would be my best model? And if I have
displeased you in my late conduct, think how much I have been led into
the error by your own directions?"

"Georgina, your heart must tell you, that I could never intend, by any
suggestions on my part, that you should form an _intimacy_ with such
a person as Mr. Leslie Winyard, at least such an intimacy as you seem
to have done by these notes. It is true I might have bid you lay aside
the foolish expectation that I should be ever at your side in public;
but I could never judge so ill of your understanding, as to suppose
that such expressions, on my part, could be interpreted to the extent
of endangering your honour and my happiness. But proceed. You have not
yet told me how this intimacy has grown, or what encouragement you have
given to justify such insolent presumption."

"Indeed, indeed, Glenmore, I can hardly tell you how. But first,
whenever I _was_ in public, you were always absent; or, if not absent,
at least occupied with others and not with myself. I sat alone,
_ennuyé_, and with a feeling of desertion. At the _écarté_ parties,
especially, I felt desolate. To them, you know, no young, unmarried
ladies were admitted; and the persons who composed the society were
either engaged in play, or else those who sat out were so engaged,
two and two, in conversation at distant parts of the room, that I
felt awkward in attempting to join them. Oh! how I have sat, night
after night, in those fine rooms, thinking how little they afforded
happiness, and wishing myself any where else! The first person who paid
me any attention was Mr. Leslie Winyard. I found him agreeable and
entertaining; and neither saw nor heard, in his manner or conversation,
any thing that the whole world might not have seen or heard with me.
If others spoke to me, it was a matter of form, or only a passing
word, without seeming to care whether I answered or not; while he,
on the contrary, always listened to what I had to say with apparent
interest,--always seemed impressed with a wish to please me whenever
we met; and thus our intimacy commenced. Deprived of you, Glenmore, I
thought there was no harm in amusing myself in public during the time
that I was there; instead of being quite _délaissée_. _You_ know how
unwilling I was to enter on a life of dissipation." Lord Glenmore again
sighed, as if in assent to the truth of these words; and blamed himself
inwardly that he had ever suffered Lady Glenmore to mingle, unprotected
by himself, in society which now, for the first time, appeared to him,
in its full force, to be of such dangerous tendency, that he felt he
ought to have known better.

"But your greater intimacy abroad," he went on to ask, "Georgina? for
it was abroad that these notes seem to have been written. Did you
receive none such before your departure?"

"None, on my sacred word," she replied.

"Then how came you to admit them?"

"Oh! I can scarcely tell. Sometimes we were left in doubt, the evening
before, whether our party was to take place on the following day or
not, and he wrote to me to know _how_ it was to be. Then I sometimes
returned fatigued with our day's excursion, and a note of inquiry would
arrive. Then another morning would come flowers, another music, and
with all these came notes."

"Did you ever answer them?"

"Very seldom, for you know I hate writing; and when I did it was only a
literal word of reply to some question about the hour at which we were
to ride or dine out. The notes themselves will tell you this, Glenmore,
for they complain of never being answered."

"But if you did not answer, you valued them, Georgina, or you would not
have preserved them."

"Yes," she replied, "I liked the attention they proved; but that was
all. _I_ meant no harm; and though Lady Tenderden frequently knew of
the circumstance, she never reproved me for receiving them."

"Did Lady Tenderden," exclaimed Lord Glenmore with surprise, "never
tell you you were in the wrong, or, at least, imprudent?"

"No--no," Lady Glenmore answered with some hesitation, and as if
endeavouring to recollect herself.

"You hesitate, Georgina. Did Lady Tenderden, I ask you pointedly, never
make any remark on Mr. Leslie Winyard's attentions to you?"

"Yes, yes; once she did say something."

"What was it?" asked Lord Glenmore, with breathless impatience.

"She told me that I should not encourage Mr. Leslie Winyard _alone_;
that it was bad taste to have but one cavalier; that he would grow
tired of me if I did not divide my preference."

"Gracious heaven!" exclaimed Lord Glenmore, striking his hands
together; "and is it to this guardianship that I have intrusted
you?--But the picture, Georgina, the picture! tell me, how came the
picture of that man in your possession?"

"His picture!" repeated Lady Glenmore with surprise.

"Yes," rejoined Lord Glenmore sternly; and taking it from beneath the
papers, pointed to it.

"Oh! I remember now; I had totally forgotten it. But one day, when I
was writing, he came up to me. We had been talking, the evening before,
of remembering people and their features in absence, and I had declared
my inability to recall any one, however intimate, to my memory, when I
did not see them; and then he said he could not bear me to forget him,
and he would put his portrait in my _porte-feuille_, which I conclude
he did; but indeed, indeed I have never looked at it or thought of it
since;"--and she raised her eloquent eyes, streaming with tears, full
in Lord Glenmore's face.

The latter, during the whole of what had passed, felt that his wife was
only the victim of the system of that society in which she had been
cast. He could not for a moment believe that the expression of that
genuine feeling which had been displayed could have been assumed,--that
the undisguised truth had not been elicited in every word that had
fallen from Lady Glenmore's lips,--that she had been led away by the
vanity of a designing man's attention, and during a season, _perhaps_,
of neglect on his part.

How could he then, if his honour and her heart were still unpolluted,
deal harshly by her? Lord Glenmore's views, on all subjects, were
clear and decided; and from what he had elicited from Lady Glenmore,
his purpose was fixed, provided she answered him satisfactorily on two
points, and with the same ingenuous spirit, and the same conviction.
Turning to her, therefore, with much solemnity, he said,

"Georgina, you have been foolish: I believe this to be the extent
of your error. I, perhaps, have been unwise in trusting too much to
your discretion. But before I can again repose confidence in you, you
must first assure me, in the most solemn manner, that you have told
me _all_,--that you have concealed no part of this transaction from
me:--you must swear it."

"I swear," exclaimed Lady Glenmore; and falling on her knees, once more
raised her hands and eyes to heaven, in affirmation of her words, and
in agony of feeling.

Lord Glenmore was deeply agitated. "And then," he continued, his voice
faltering with emotion, "you must promise me that you will break off
all intercourse and acquaintance with that man."

"All, all!" she cried, embracing his knees; "joyfully I will break it
off," and raising an imploring look of love up to his face.

"Voluntarily, freely," he continued, as he gazed at her.

"Yes, Glenmore," she repeated, with deep earnestness. "What is he or
his hated name to me, if you but love me? Only trust me, try me, and
you will find how devotedly I am your own."

Lord Glenmore was deeply affected; and as she clung to his knees,
raised her in his arms, and pressed her convulsively to his heart.

"_I will trust you, Georgina_," he said, as he impressed a kiss on her
forehead--the seal of peace; nor was it impressed in vain. "And now,"
he added, "you require repose. This has been a deep lesson to you and
to myself. Go to your chamber, Georgina, and thank God, as I do, that
you have been thus saved from degradation and misery." Again Lady
Glenmore flinging herself into those dear arms which no longer repelled
her embrace, wept for some moments on his neck delicious tears of
penitence and love.

Once more alone, Lord Glenmore reviewed all that had passed; and in
the calm reflection of a strong mind saw at once the miserable cause,
and the nearly fatal effects, of a mode of life, the awful dangers
of which he had never till then questioned. He had the honesty to
perceive in his own conduct much more to blame than in that of his
young and inexperienced wife. His belief amounted to conviction of her
innocence, even in regard to the imprudence into which she had been
betrayed. A thousand times did he condemn his own mistaken course, and
his too confiding nature, as the cause of all that had occurred. A
thousand instances did he recall of his having placed Lady Glenmore in
circumstances where a less virtuous nature than hers would have fallen
a more easy sacrifice.

The delusion of the false system of society in which she had been
cast was now unveiled, and a thousand proofs of the immorality and
viciousness which marked the course of those with whom he had
habitually lived now stared him in the face; and with a deep feeling
of gratitude he raised the voice of thanksgiving to Heaven, that the
mist of error had been dispelled in time to save her who was dearer to
him than his own life, and in whose happiness his own was involved. How
to break from the entanglements of a society which had produced these
baneful results was a reflection of difficulty.

Lord Glenmore was too much a man of the world, and too good and just
a person, to act hastily in such circumstances; for he well knew that
to do so would be only to draw down upon himself and his wife the
animadversions of the world at large, and the rancour of those from
whom he separated; and in this his wife's character must suffer. It
required, therefore, the calmness of repose, and the deliberation of a
less agitated mind, to decide on the after-measures to be taken; and
with the determination of adopting such as might appear best suited to
the circumstances of the case, he retired, at length, to rest.




CHAPTER XIII.

FINAL DEVELOPMENT OF A DANGEROUS SYSTEM.


Whatever confidence Lord Glenmore felt in possessing the full and
undivided affections of Lady Glenmore, yet the particulars of such a
disclosure as had come to light, of her intimacy with Leslie Winyard,
could not fail, for a long period, to throw a gloom on his existence;
and gave birth to a feeling, that the happiness which he had hitherto
contemplated as unclouded was now obscured by some of those shades
which are incident to all human enjoyments, and which are wisely
ordered to wean us, perhaps, from a world we might otherwise love too
well.

Convinced, however, that Lady Glenmore had been timely saved from
falling a prey to circumstances arising out of the nature of the
society into which she was thrown, and which he could not help
considering were in a great measure the result of his own want of
forethought and care, he felt assured that the decision he had come to
was as much his _duty_, as his heart told him it was his _desire_.

To withdraw Lady Glenmore from that circle was nevertheless no easy
task. Habits of conventional dissipation are seldom broken through
without producing a mutual aversion between the parties. From this
feeling, on the part of her former associates, it was his anxious wish
to guard Lady Glenmore; for he felt that to a young and inexperienced
heart there can be no greater temptation to return to error, than to
be exposed to those sneers and contemptuous remarks which the world of
folly is ever ready to apply when it finds itself tacitly reproved.

While, therefore, Lady Glenmore remained exposed, as she must of
necessity be for a season, to the casual society of Lady Tenderden,
Lady Tilney, and the rest of that party, it would have been impolitic,
with the views Lord Glenmore entertained, for him to have adopted any
very marked change in his own or Lady Glenmore's outward deportment
towards them. But he laid a sure and better foundation of future
propriety in the conduct of his wife, by developing to her the dangers
and awful consequences which, now that his fears had been timely
awakened, he saw existed in the mode of life and peculiar society in
which they had hitherto taken a part.

Struck with dismay at the contemplation of the picture he drew, and
while there was no reason to appeal further than to her own good sense,
Lord Glenmore felt convinced that the veil had been seasonably removed
from _her_ eyes as well as _his own_; and that, with a conviction of
the danger which surrounded her, and with affections firmly fixed upon
himself, he might discard all fear for the future on _her_ account.
In regard to her acquaintance, however, with Mr. Leslie Winyard, a
more decided line was necessarily taken; and although this step gave
rise to some whispers among the younger and more licentious part of
the society, and elicited innuendos from Leslie Winyard himself, under
which, with real baseness, he sought to conceal the mortification of
his abrupt dismissal, yet the more prudent of the _coterie_ rejoiced in
the circumstance, as averting the danger of a _public scandal_ which
threatened them.

Amongst this number Lady Tilney was loud in dwelling on the fortunate
_dénouement_ of an affair which, had it terminated otherwise, might
have been detrimental to the interests of the circle in which she
reigned; and arrogated to herself the whole merit of having, by her
good policy, been the means of bringing it to this conclusion:--a false
and unhallowed presumption, thus to attribute to human agency alone,
and human foresight, events which proceed from a higher source than
this world's wisdom can reach! but which is too common an error in
minds where religion is not the abiding principle.

Neither Lady Tilney, however, nor any of the _coterie_, were aware of
the determination of Lord and Lady Glenmore to withdraw themselves
ultimately from their circle; an event which movements in the political
world, as unexpected as they were generally deprecated, greatly
facilitated, and of which Lord Glenmore failed not to take advantage,
as much for the sake of his domestic peace, as for the maintenance
of his political principles. Measures which he felt he never could
consistently support were on the point of being brought forward by the
head of the ministry; and with that frankness and decision of character
which had marked his whole life, he sought permission to retire from
public affairs, and resign the office which he held.

Aware of the importance of his support, the minister of the day long
sought to retain him on his side; but no arguments of expediency
could overcome the fixed principles of right and wrong by which Lord
Glenmore was actuated; and he finally succeeded in liberating himself
from the toils of an office which, since the late threatened overthrow
of his domestic peace, he had found induced too great a sacrifice
of more essential points of happiness. Equally rejoiced with Lord
Glenmore was Lord Albert D'Esterre at this event, for in the present
state of his mind he found mixing in public, which his official
situation imposed upon him, a most irksome burden; and he hailed with
satisfaction a circumstance which, as a natural consequence of Lord
Glenmore's resignation, freed him also from the toils of office. The
first favourable result that accrued from this change was, that it
threw Lord Glenmore and Lord Albert more together; who, in the leisure
of retirement, experienced the sweets of that steady friendship which
is the offspring of mutual esteem.

In a proposal which, soon after these occurrences, Lord Glenmore made
to Lord Albert, of taking advantage of their liberation to go abroad,
the latter readily joined; not only as being his friend's wish but also
as one in which he would have sooner indulged himself, except for the
pain he endured at the thought of quitting Lord Glenmore. All barriers
to his wishes in this respect being removed, the arrangements for a
foreign tour were soon completed; and leaving the _coterie_ astonished
at the _mauvais ton_ of their quitting London in the middle of _the
season_, and when no one was at Paris, and no inducement could exist
for a _séjour_ abroad, according to their calculation, Lord Glenmore
and Lord Albert were soon consigned to oblivion, and ceased to be
subjects of conversation.

They, on their part, quitted London without one of those regrets so
generally experienced by the young and gay when bidding adieu to so
many seducing phantoms of pleasure--phantoms, however, whose fallacy
they had too deeply proved, ever to permit a moment's power over them
in future.

The reunited friends pursued their journey in the same route; and
although Lord Albert's heart was any thing but light, a degree of
serenity was gradually restored to him in the calm of reflection,
the interest of the scenes he passed through, and above all in that
reflected ray of happiness which he caught from his friend.

A year in this manner had passed away, and Lord Glenmore had recovered
that even cheerfulness which is a test of the heart's happiness, and
which the assurance of Lady Glenmore's devotedness to himself, and
total abandonment of all wish to re-enter scenes from which he had
withdrawn her, were calculated to restore. It was at this period that
the party found themselves at Naples: and here Lord Albert's proximity
to that country of classic name which he had once before visited,
and which again seemed to call him to the contemplation of all the
interests and beauties which it ever retains, together with that spirit
of restlessness, which is the concomitant of an unoccupied heart,
tempted him once more to revisit Greece.

In fulfilling this wish, however, he remained some time undecided,
from his averseness to quit the Glenmores; but when Lady Glenmore's
health at length prevented the possibility of their removing from
Naples, he decided on resigning the society of his friends for a few
months, and prepared for his departure. However lively his regret at
the moment of separation, and however irksome his absence, from Lord
Glenmore might appear, Lord Albert's stay in Greece was prolonged far
beyond his original intention; for who, once having tasted the delights
attendant on Grecian travel, can readily forego the charm it affords?
If there is earthly balm for a wounded spirit, it is in the feelings
and reflections which such scenes inspire.

In the correspondence that continued between Lord Glenmore and Lord
Albert D'Esterre, he found the former had quitted Italy, and intended
to pass the winter in Munich. When, therefore, his own affairs called
him imperatively back to England, he took his route through Germany;
and arriving late at Munich, stopped there for the night, in order to
enjoy a few hours society with the only persons who still, he believed,
were solicitous to retain his friendship. The announcement of his
arrival was quickly followed by his presence at the hotel inhabited by
Lord Glenmore. The meeting and reception were such as may be imagined,
though seldom realized, between friends so cordially united; and if it
suffered any alloy, it was the contrasted loneliness of Lord Albert's
heart with the domestic felicity of Lord Glenmore. But although he felt
the pang of self-regret, he was not insensible to the reflected joy of
Lord Glenmore's happiness.

His transient visit was soon followed by the declaration of his
intended departure on the morrow. But who can tell what a day may
bring forth? From this intention he was eagerly dissuaded by the
joint entreaties of Lord and Lady Glenmore; and yielding to their
solicitations, and the prospect of the pleasure of their society,
rather than to the inducement they held out of a court festival that
was to take place the following day, he gave a reluctant acquiescence
to retard his journey, and promised his attendance at the Court.

On the morrow, Lord Albert arrived at the palace, but late; and was
obliged to hurry through the apartments, in order to be in time for
his presentation. This formality gone through, he was leisurely
retracing his way to rejoin the Glenmores, who stood in a distant part
of the circle, when his eyes were attracted to a form which he thought
he recognised, but so changed, so pale, so much taller than he had
been used to recollect as the image of the person whom the features
represented, that he stopped for a moment in doubt. But that moment
was sufficient to make him remember all. It was Lady Adeline Seymour
who stood before him. For a moment he paused, and was irresolute how
to act. His head swam round, and every object in the room became one
confused mass. He looked for a way to escape; but escape there was
none, without causing much observation, the circle was so closely
drawn; and he found he must inevitably proceed in the direction where
this magic phantom stood. He endeavoured to arm himself for the dreaded
trial; but with every nerve trembling, and every pulse beating, he
was forced to move on. He endeavoured to fix his eyes on the ground,
but, in despite of himself, they were constantly raised to the object
that so irresistibly attracted them. As he drew nearer, he observed
Lady Dunmelraise leaning on the arm of her daughter. Again he started,
and gasped with uncontrollable emotion. The Court was breaking up.
The current of the throng set in one way, and pressed upon him till
he found himself absolutely borne close to the very beings whom,
of all others, it caused him the most violent agitation of mingled
feelings to meet. "Lord Albert D'Esterre" exclaimed Lady Dunmelraise,
and, courtesying, she half smiled as she recognised him. He bowed
in silence, unable to speak. Lady Dunmelraise continued to address
him:--"Have you been long at Munich, Lord Albert?" "Yes--no--yes--no. I
have been"----and he murmured a few incoherent words that admitted of
any interpretation, but which she did not misunderstand.

"Adeline, dear!" she said, turning to her daughter, whose head had
drooped, and whose eyes sought the ground, "Adeline! do you not
recognise Lord Albert D'Esterre?" Lady Adeline bowed without speaking,
or raising her head. She was powerless. Lord Albert's eyes were
fixed in stupified amazement on her. The crowd had now congregated
around them, and it was impossible for either party to move. Painful
as this situation was, Lord Albert thought he read, in the tremor
of Lady Adeline's frame, a something indefinable indeed, but which,
nevertheless, breathed of tender reminiscence. In another minute, the
glove and fan which she held in her hand dropped from her trembling
hold.

Lord Albert hastened to recover them; and, in presenting them to her,
the whole recollection of the scene at the Court of London flashed
vividly on his mind: the myrtle sprig, the look that had accompanied
the bequest of it to him, all returned to _his_ remembrance; and had
it faded entirely from hers? He ventured not to speak; but in this act
of common courtesy, while holding the fan by one end as she touched
it at the other, there was a mutually tremulous vibration that passed
through it, which told him of _all that was thrilling_ in her heart at
the moment, and which instinctively conveyed to him a renovated gleam
of hope. Under these feelings, Lord Albert, in his turn, stooped his
head to hide the tear that started to his eye, as he acknowledged--for
how could he do otherwise than acknowledge?--that _this_ was not the
feeling of one indifferent to him.

It needed, however, only a moment's reflection to repress the
presumptuous joy which for an instant filled his breast; and, with
wounds fresh opened, he sought the opportunity which a movement in the
crowd afforded him to rush from the palace to his carriage. Thence he
drove impetuously to his hotel, called his servants, gave orders for
instant preparations for departure, and hastily changing his dress, and
desiring his carriage to attend him at Lord Glenmore's hotel, proceeded
thither.

He entered with excited feelings, and a spirit irritated by the most
contradictory emotions, and half-inclined to reproach Lord Glenmore
for having exposed him to the painful scene which he had just passed
through. Lord Albert met him on the staircase, that moment returned
from Court. Lord Glenmore looked at him at first with astonishment, and
then at his change of dress.

"Glenmore," said Lord Albert in a hurried tone, "I must speak to
you;"--and as they entered his apartment, he continued, in agitation:

"Why have you exposed me to this scene? Why did you not tell me that
she was here? I have met Adeline;"--and he sunk into a chair, unable to
utter more.

"My dear D'Esterre," Lord Glenmore replied, "forgive me. You must know
how far it is from any wish of my heart to pain or agitate yours.
That you should have met Lady Adeline under circumstances distressing
to your feelings, you may believe I deeply lament: that I knew she was
resident here, it could never be my intention to conceal from you: but
that your meeting will be ultimately productive of mutual happiness to
you both (however agonizing at the moment), I cannot for an instant
doubt." Lord Albert paced the room in agitation.

"Hear me; only hear me, D'Esterre, for a few moments." Lord Albert
again cast himself into a seat.

"Let me tell you, then, quietly, that since we parted, and particularly
since our residence in this place, Lady Adeline has become the intimate
friend of my wife. Her secret thoughts have been revealed to Georgina.
Need I tell what these thoughts are? They reveal an attachment the
truest and most refined that ever warmed a heart, and that heart is
wholly and unchangeably your own. Was it possible, D'Esterre, that,
knowing you as I do, I should allow what I believe to be the truth to
remain secret, and not inform my wife that your affections were in
reality centred in Lady Adeline? And again, as your friend, knowing,
or, at least, surmising, all those unfortunate circumstances which
had arisen to separate you, that I should not endeavour to clear up
the misapprehension, and remedy the evil? Was it, too, possible, would
it have been the part of a real friend, had I deferred for an instant
seeking to place every thing in its true light to Lady Dunmelraise?
I should, indeed, have been unworthy of the character, if, from a
momentary fear of your displeasure, I had forborne to do so. This I
have done, D'Esterre;"--and Lord Glenmore added, half smiling, and
extending his hand to him as he spoke, "and for this, as well as for
the meeting that has just taken place, I feel you cannot _blame_ me."

"You are all goodness," exclaimed Lord Albert mournfully. "But what
then?" he cried with gasping eagerness, "what can it all avail me?"

"What then! why this, D'Esterre--the crowning of your wishes, the
fulfilment of your happiness. I found Lady Dunmelraise almost as much
enlightened as to the circumstances which broke off your engagement
with Lady Adeline as myself; and, in avowing this knowledge, she
accompanied it with expressions of regret that she had not herself been
more explicit on the subject to you.

"With this understanding of Lady Dunmelraise's sentiments, and the
conviction of Lady Adeline's affections being wholly yours, have I
acted wrong, even in apparent violation of your feelings, in bringing
about this interview? After all, the first meeting has been, perhaps,
as little trying to both as could well be; and it has, with this
explanation, I hope, opened the way to a more delightful reverie still.
D'Esterre, I adjure you by our friendship, by your own happiness,
trust to me, trust to Georgina, and suffer not this fortunate moment
to escape! Give way to the genuine impulse of your heart. Let not any
false pride, any untimely fears, influence you; but empower me, this
very instant, to go to Lady Dunmelraise, and prepare the way for your
reception."

Lord Albert D'Esterre, with a sense of happiness too overpowering to
admit of any distinct feeling, yielded up all the latent prejudices
and pride of his nature, which Lady Dunmelraise's rejection still left
rankling in his bosom; and, overcome by the tender entreaties of Lord
Glenmore, he at last convulsively exclaimed,

"Go, go, Glenmore! but do not deceive me; do not place me in any
position unworthy of your friend." Lord Glenmore waited not an instant,
but flew to Lady Dunmelraise, the happy messenger of happy tidings.
The purpose of his mission was soon made known, and as soon acceded to;
and when Lord Albert, the victim of delusion, found himself once more
in Lady Dunmelraise's presence, the cordial pressure of the hand, the
expressions of pleasure at again meeting, the tearful eye, and soft
intonation of voice, soon assured him that all the justice that could
be done him had already taken effect in Lady Dunmelraise's mind; and
the half-broken, half-murmured sentences which he attempted in reply
were interrupted by the latter calling to Lady Adeline Seymour from the
adjoining room. As she came forward with downcast looks and trembling
footstep, Lord Albert hastened towards her, took her hands in his, and
as he pressed them to his lips, asked her "if she could forgive him?"

In sounds almost inarticulate, she pronounced his name; and as her
head was bowed down, overcome with the agitation of such a moment,
Lady Dunmelraise approached, pressed their united hands together, and
blessed them as her children.

With what inebriation of happiness did Lord Albert quit this scene!
with what a cheered and gladdened spirit did he return to Lord
Glenmore! with what an overflowing spirit of thankfulness did he pour
forth his acknowledgments to the friend who, under Providence, had
restored him to happiness, and with such judicious zeal guided and
counselled him to reach the goal!--For these feelings there are no
words. To Lady Glenmore also he opened his whole soul, and condemned
repeatedly his misapprehension of Adeline's conduct, and his own want
of candour; while he listened with rapturous delight to every fresh
proof which fell from Lady Glenmore's lips, of Lady Adeline's love;
though even in this, there was an anguish mingled with the joy, to
think how little he had merited the devotion of such a heart. After
some hours had passed, during which Lord Albert, in the delirium of his
felicity, scarcely could persuade himself of the reality of a change
which so short a time had wrought in his existence, he became calmer;
and looking back on the past, he could not but see the over-ruling hand
of Providence in all that had befallen him.

The unthinking might call it a chance, which had opened up to him
the real character of Lady Hamlet Vernon; and, in the same mistaken
levity, might have attributed to the same blind accident the serious
reflections which this discovery brought in its train: and continuing
in this error, they might ascribe to the same fortuitous power, that he
had reached Munich, a desolate and forlorn being, to whom no object
in life presented itself to cheer existence or stimulate exertion; and
that, now, how the evolution of a few hours had reversed the whole
picture, and placed him on the summit of human happiness!--Yes, the
unthinking and the hardened may ascribe all this to chance: but the
wise and good know that _chance_ is only another word for Providence;
and that in every turn of our lives, in every minutia which affects
our existence here or hereafter, there is a mightier power to be
acknowledged than any secondary cause can alone produce.

"D'Esterre," said Lord Glenmore, as the latter entered the apartment
where he was sitting with Lady Glenmore, "D'Esterre, do you know that
your carriage has been waiting for hours at the door?" and smiling as
he added, "I presume it may go back to your hotel, for I have to tell
you that Lady Dunmelraise and Lady Adeline will be here directly." Lord
Albert looked his delighted thanks. "And if you intend to make any
toilette for dinner," continued the former, "there is no time to lose."
Lord Albert arose, pressed the hands of both his friends to his heart,
and promised to return instantly.

As he descended the staircase, he saw his old servant Comtois, who
held his travelling cloak. Lord Albert said, as he passed him, "No,
Comtois, no." The former made a sign to the courier to mount. Lord
Albert observed this, and turning round, added, "Comtois, I shall not
set off to-day."

"No, _milor_?" rejoined the latter with surprise, his features catching
a portion of the joy that gleamed from his master's face, and to which
such an expression had long been a stranger. "_Milor, donc, a changé
d'intention: il ne part pas._"

"No, Comtois; and I must dress as soon as possible, so go to my hotel."
The servant hastened forward to execute these orders, with as much
alacrity as Lord Albert had shown in giving them; and the grave tone
of command to the courier to return with the carriage was changed to
one almost of friendly familiarity, as he said, nodding to him, "Luigi,
_nous ne partons pas_. _Vite à l'hôtel._"

It would be vain to attempt to describe all that passed, all that was
said and looked, when they met, between the now happy Lord Albert and
Lady Adeline. Much time at Munich was not suffered to elapse, before
arrangements were made for Lady Dunmelraise's and her daughter's return
to England, whither they were accompanied by Lord Albert; and when
arrived there, their union was to take place as soon as possible. Lord
and Lady Glenmore were entreated to return in time for the ceremony;
and the former, re-assured by the two years' devotion and increasing
attachment of his wife, now saw no reason for his prolonged stay on the
continent.

Lord Albert D'Esterre, on his arrival in England, found some little
difficulty in explaining satisfactorily to his father Lord Tresyllian's
mind all the contradictory circumstances which had led to Lady
Adeline's rejection of him, and in regaining his approbation of their
union; but the wounded pride of the latter was at length appeased by
the most satisfactory details of all the occurrences, and beyond this
Lord Tresyllian had little feeling. The marriage took place a few
days after the arrival of the Glenmores, and for nine days formed the
subject of wonder and conversation in the _coterie_ of the exclusives,
in which Lord Albert had so nearly made a wreck of happiness.

With this circle, a few excepted, no renewal of intimacy took place,
either on the part of Lord Albert or Lord Glenmore. They found, by
public report, that the fate of some who had figured in it had been
such as their course must sooner or later have brought them to.
Mr. Leslie Winyard had married, a few months after Lady Glenmore's
departure, an heiress of immense wealth; who, dazzled with the idea
of obtaining the _entrée_ into that circle of _ton_ in which he moved,
and betrayed by the delusive hope of reclaiming him from its more
destructive follies by her love and devotion, had given him her hand,
her fortune, and her happiness. Enormous, however, as was her wealth,
it was soon dissipated in the payment of his previous debts, and the
endless extravagances into which he plunged: and in eighteen months
after their union she had died of a broken heart; having lived to
witness the foul desertion of the man for whom she had sacrificed every
thing, and who was then living, in open violation of all religious and
moral feeling, with a recent victim of his seduction.

Lady Glenmore shuddered as she heard these details, and lifted up her
hands in silent thanksgiving to the Almighty for having been preserved
from so awful a fate. As regarded Lord Albert, if any thing could have
been requisite to confirm him in the proper estimate he had formed
of Lady Hamlet Vernon's character, and the danger he had escaped, he
would have found it in _her_ subsequent history; for, pursuing the
same course of intrigue in which she had so nearly involved him, she
at length fell into the toils spread for others, and became the dupe
of her own vicious folly. Brought to a situation in which the fruits
of her conduct would soon become glaringly apparent, and which, if
discovered, must have driven her from that circle where every thing
depended on avoiding _detection_, and scorned by the man she had sought
to inveigle, she was obliged, as a last resource, to veil her infamy
by a marriage with Mr. Foley, with whom she lived at present on those
terms of mutual unhappiness which would naturally be the consequence of
such a union.

Some few there were of the _coterie_, who had been timely warned, and,
seeing the tendency of the course they were pursuing, had withdrawn
from the magic sphere to better and more stable pursuits. Among
these was Lord Gascoigne, whose quick intelligence and clear head,
accompanied by a goodness of heart which he often concealed under a
show of levity, had preserved him from losing himself entirely in
the vortex of folly. Lord and Lady Baskerville, too, had seen their
error--an error more of the head arising from the contamination of
example, than of the heart; and who now lived as became their station,
and in the way which bade a fair promise for virtuous happiness; while
others of the number continued their heartless round, without coming
to any open disgrace, and yet without making any reform. Among these,
again, was Lady Tilney, who continued still the _soi-disant_ queen
of _ton_, blind to the approach of that period when her empire must
yield, in despite of all her strenuous efforts to uphold it, to that of
some fresh rising beauty; and still insensible to the dreadful vacuum
which in the decline of life, without the sincerity of friendship and
the resources of a well-cultivated mind--above all, without religious
trust to cheer and gild the setting sun of life--must be the miserable
portion of every human creature.

One _distingué_ member of the _coterie_ was on the eve of leaving it
and the country, not willingly, but from imperative circumstances. The
Comtesse Leinsengen, who had for years played the part of a crafty
_diplomatiste_ with the government, as well as endeavoured to extend
her rule over the circles of fashion, had found herself at last foiled
in her political objects: and too proud to bear this defeat, she had
announced her departure as decisive; an event that to the minister
afforded a feeling of triumph, and no less of secret joy in the breast
of Lady Tilney, who had found in her "_dear friend_" her most dreaded
rival and pertinacious opponent. Oh! what a melancholy reflection to
think, if the Comtesse Leinsengen ever did think on any thing beyond
views of self-interest and the gratification of self-love, that an
intimacy with those with whom she had lived for so many years had been
productive of no one friendship that deserved the name, and given birth
to no one regret when she was about to leave them probably for ever!

Such, however, would be found to be the case with almost every
individual forming part of this circle, where selfishness,
heartlessness, and cold over-reaching, alternately swayed every action;
passions which, when delineated, at some future day, as they appear
exemplified in individual characters on the scene, will give additional
strength to the moral lesson intended to be conveyed by this general
view of EXCLUSIVE SOCIETY.


THE END.


LONDON: PRINTED BY THOMAS DAVISON, WHITEFRIARS.




INTERESTING WORKS JUST PUBLISHED, BY HENRY COLBURN AND RICHARD BENTLEY,
NEW BURLINGTON-STREET.


  The BOOK of the BOUDOIR. By LADY MORGAN. 2 vols.

  The NEW FOREST, a Novel. By the author of "Brambletye
  House." 3 vols.

  DEVEREUX. By the author of "Pelham," and "The
  Disowned." 3 vols.

  The SCHOOL of FASHION. 3 vols.

"A true index to the tastes and feelings of the great world. The author
is known to be a person of high rank, and this is a circumstance to
which some weight is really due, when a book professes to depict the
lives and manners of the aristocracy. But in this instance the author
is more than merely a person of high rank: it is impossible to read her
book without acknowledging that she is also a person of lively talents
and quick observation, with a keen sense of the ridiculous, united by
rather a rare combination with clear sound sense and perspicacity of
judgment."--_Courier._


 TALES of an INDIAN CAMP. In 3 vols. post 8vo. 31_s._ 6_d._

 TALES of MY TIME. By the author of "Blue Stocking Hall." In 3 vols.
 post 8vo.

 STORIES of WATERLOO.--CONTENTS: Waterloo--The Field of Battle--The
 Seventeenth of June--Quatre Bras--Ligny--Brussels--The Dead
 Dragoon--Napoleon and his Army--The Captain of Grenadiers--The
 Detachment--The Route--The Outlaw's Story--The March--Story of Colonel
 Hilson--Sarsfield--Maurice Mac Carthy--The Champ de Mai--Belgium--The
 Cavalry Picket--Napoleon's Return, &c. &c. In 3 vols. post 8vo. 28_s._
 6_d._

 The CHELSEA PENSIONERS. By the author of the "Subaltern."
 3 vols.--CONTENTS: The Gentle Recruit--A Day on Neutral
 Ground--Saratoga--Maida--A Pyrenean Adventure--The Rivals.




_Works published by Colburn and Bentley._


  1. STORIES of a BRIDE. By the Authoress of "The Mummy." 3 vols.

  2. THE BORDERERS. An AMERICAN TALE. By the Author of "The Prairie,"
     "The Red Rover," &c.

  3. THE KING'S PAGE. A Novel. 3 vols.

  4. THE DAVENELS: or, A CAMPAIGN OF FASHION IN DUBLIN. 2 vols. 18s.

  5. OLD COURT, a Novel. 3 vols.

     "This Romance is the work of a very able pen."--_Court Journal._

  6. RICHELIEU, A TALE OF THE COURT OF FRANCE. 3 vols.

     "A very superior work, and one well calculated for extensive
     popularity."--_Literary Gazette._

  7. ECARTÉ; or, the SALONS OF PARIS. 3 vols. 28s. 6d.

  8. THE NAVAL OFFICER; or, SCENES and ADVENTURES in the LIFE OF FRANK
     MILDMAY. 3 vols.

  9. WALDEGRAVE. A TALE of the SOUTH. 3 vols. 27s.

 10. RYBRENT de CRUCE. 3 vols. 28s. 6d.

     "The production of an intelligent and cultivated person."--_New
     Monthly Magazine._

     "This is a very clever novel."--_Literary Gazette._

 11. GERALDINE of DESMOND; or, IRELAND in the REIGN of ELIZABETH. 3
     vols.

     "The work will take its station among the best historical romances
     that have ever been written."--_Cheltenham Chronicle._

 12. BLUE STOCKING HALL. Second Edition. 3 vols. 27s.

 13. TALES of a VOYAGER to the ARCTIC OCEAN. SECOND SERIES. 3 vols.

 14. THE CARBONARO. A TALE, by the DUKE DE LEVIS. 2 vols.

 15. THE SECTARIAN; or, The CHURCH and the MEETING-HOUSE. 3 vols.

 16. TALES of WOMAN, Illustrative of the FEMALE CHARACTER. 2 vols.

 17. THE MAN of TWO LIVES. A NARRATIVE, WRITTEN by HIMSELF. 2 vols.

 18. THE CASTILIAN. A SPANISH TALE. 3 vols.




TRANSCRIBER'S NOTE:

Obvious printer errors have been corrected. Otherwise, the author's
original spelling, punctuation and hyphenation have been left intact.






        
            *** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE EXCLUSIVES (VOL. 3 OF 3) ***
        

    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.




